RHYME a b b a c d c e d e

And has the truth brought no new hope at all,
Heart, that you're weeping yet for Paradise?
Do they still whisper, the old weary cries?
"'MID YOUTH AND SONG, FEASTING AND CARNIVAL,
THROUGH LAUGHTER, THROUGH THE ROSES, AS OF OLD
COMES DEATH, ON SHADOWY AND RELENTLESS FEET,
DEATH, UNAPPEASABLE BY PRAYER OR GOLD;
DEATH IS THE END, THE END!"
Proud, then, clear-eyed and laughing, go to greet
Death as a friend!

RHYME a a b c b c d e f d f e

Exile of immortality, strongly wise,
Strain through the dark with undesirous eyes
To what may lie beyond it.  Sets your star,
O heart, for ever!  Yet, behind the night,
Waits for the great unborn, somewhere afar,
Some white tremendous daybreak.  And the light,
Returning, shall give back the golden hours,
Ocean a windless level, Earth a lawn
Spacious and full of sunlit dancing-places,
And laughter, and music, and, among the flowers,
The gay child-hearts of men, and the child-faces
O heart, in the great dawn!

TITLE Day That I Have Loved

RHYME a b a b

Tenderly, day that I have loved, I close your eyes,
 And smooth your quiet brow, and fold your thin dead hands.
The grey veils of the half-light deepen; colour dies.
 I bear you, a light burden, to the shrouded sands,

RHYME a b a b

Where lies your waiting boat, by wreaths of the sea's making
 Mist-garlanded, with all grey weeds of the water crowned.
There you'll be laid, past fear of sleep or hope of waking;
 And over the unmoving sea, without a sound,

RHYME a b a b

Faint hands will row you outward, out beyond our sight,
 Us with stretched arms and empty eyes on the far-gleaming
And marble sand. . . . Beyond the shifting cold twilight,
 Further than laughter goes, or tears, further than dreaming,

RHYME a b a b

There'll be no port, no dawn-lit islands!  But the drear
 Waste darkening, and, at length, flame ultimate on the deep.
Oh, the last fire -- and you, unkissed, unfriended there!
 Oh, the lone way's red ending, and we not there to weep!

RHYME a b a b

(We found you pale and quiet, and strangely crowned with flowers,
 Lovely and secret as a child.  You came with us,
Came happily, hand in hand with the young dancing hours,
 High on the downs at dawn!)  Void now and tenebrous,

RHYME a b a b

The grey sands curve before From the inland meadows,
 Fragrant of June and clover, floats the dark, and fills
The hollow sea's dead face with little creeping shadows,
 And the white silence brims the hollow of the hills.

RHYME a b a b

Close in the nest is folded every weary wing,
 Hushed all the joyful voices; and we, who held you dear,
Eastward we turn and homeward, alone, remembering . . .
 Day that I loved, day that I loved, the Night is here!

TITLE Sleeping Out: Full Moon

RHYME a b b a c c d d e e

They sleep within. . . .
I cower to the earth, I waking, I only.
High and cold thou dreamest, O queen, high-dreaming and lonely.
We have slept too long, who can hardly win
The white one flame, and the night-long crying;
The viewless passers; the world's low sighing
With desire, with yearning,
To the fire unburning,
To the heatless fire, to the flameless ecstasy! . . .
Helpless I lie.

RHYME a a b c c b d e e d d e f e f

And around me the feet of thy watchers tread.
There is a rumour and a radiance of wings above my head,
An intolerable radiance of wings. . . .
All the earth grows fire,
White lips of desire
Brushing cool on the forehead, croon slumbrous things.
Earth fades; and the air is thrilled with ways,
Dewy paths full of comfort.  And radiant bands,
The gracious presence of friendly hands,
Help the blind one, the glad one, who stumbles and strays,
Stretching wavering hands, up, up, through the praise
Of a myriad silver trumpets, through cries,
To all glory, to all gladness, to the infinite height,
To the gracious, the unmoving, the mother eyes,
And the laughter, and the lips, of light.

TITLE Pine-Trees and the Sky: Evening

RHYME a b a a b a b b a b b a

I'd watched the sorrow of the evening sky,
And smelt the sea, and earth, and the warm clover,
And heard the waves, and the seagull's mocking cry.
And in them all was only the old cry,
That song they always sing -- "The best is over!
You may remember now, and think, and sigh,
O silly lover!"
And I was tired and sick that all was over,
And because I,
For all my thinking, never could recover
One moment of the good hours that were over.
And I was sorry and sick, and wished to die.

RHYME a a b a a b a a

Then from the sad west turning wearily,
I saw the pines against the white north sky,
Very beautiful, and still, and bending over
Their sharp black heads against a quiet sky.
And there was peace in them; and I
Was happy, and forgot to play the lover,
And laughed, and did no longer wish to die;
Being glad of you, O pine-trees and the sky!

TITLE Wagner

RHYME a b a b c 
RHYME-POEM a b a b c

Creeps in half wanton, half asleep,
 One with a fat wide hairless face.
He likes love-music that is cheap;
 Likes women in a crowded place;
  And wants to hear the noise they're making.

RHYME a b a b c 
RHYME-POEM d e d e c

His heavy eyelids droop half-over,
 Great pouches swing beneath his eyes.
He listens, thinks himself the lover,
 Heaves from his stomach wheezy sighs;
  He likes to feel his heart's a-breaking.

RHYME a b a b c 
RHYME-POEM f g f g c

The music swells.  His gross legs quiver.
 His little lips are bright with slime.
The music swells.  The women shiver.
 And all the while, in perfect time,
  His pendulous stomach hangs a-shaking.

TITLE The Vision of the Archangels

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Slowly up silent peaks, the white edge of the world,
 Trod four archangels, clear against the unheeding sky,
Bearing, with quiet even steps, and great wings furled,
 A little dingy coffin; where a child must lie,
It was so tiny.  (Yet, you had fancied, God could never
 Have bidden a child turn from the spring and the sunlight,
And shut him in that lonely shell, to drop for ever
 Into the emptiness and silence, into the night. . . .)

RHYME a b b a c c

They then from the sheer summit cast, and watched it fall,
 Through unknown glooms, that frail black coffin -- and therein
 God's little pitiful Body lying, worn and thin,
And curled up like some crumpled, lonely flower-petal --
Till it was no more visible; then turned again
With sorrowful quiet faces downward to the plain.

TITLE Seaside

RHYME a b b a c d c d

Swiftly out from the friendly lilt of the band,
 The crowd's good laughter, the loved eyes of men,
 I am drawn nightward; I must turn again
Where, down beyond the low untrodden strand,
There curves and glimmers outward to the unknown
 The old unquiet ocean.  All the shade
Is rife with magic and movement.  I stray alone
 Here on the edge of silence, half afraid,

RHYME a b c b c a

Waiting a sign.  In the deep heart of me
The sullen waters swell towards the moon,
And all my tides set seaward. From inland
Leaps a gay fragment of some mocking tune,
That tinkles and laughs and fades along the sand,
And dies between the seawall and the sea.

TITLE On the Death of Smet-Smet, the Hippopotamus-Goddess

RHYME a a b b

She was wrinkled and huge and hideous?  She was our Mother.
She was lustful and lewd? -- but a God; we had none other.
In the day She was hidden and dumb, but at nightfall moaned in the shade;
We shuddered and gave Her Her will in the darkness; we were afraid.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

          She sent us pain,
           And we bowed before Her;
          She smiled again
           And bade us adore Her.
          She solaced our woe
           And soothed our sighing;
          And what shall we do
           Now God is dying?

RHYME a a b b

She was hungry and ate our children; -- how should we stay Her?
She took our young men and our maidens; -- ours to obey Her.
We were loathed and mocked and reviled of all nations; that was our pride.
She fed us, protected us, loved us, and killed us; now She has died.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

          She was so strong;
           But death is stronger.
          She ruled us long;
           But Time is longer.
          She solaced our woe
           And soothed our sighing;
          And what shall we do
           Now God is dying?

TITLE The Song of the Pilgrims

RHYME a a *

What light of unremembered skies
Hast thou relumed within our eyes,
Thou whom we seek, whom we shall find? . . .
A certain odour on the wind,
Thy hidden face beyond the west,
These things have called us; on a quest
Older than any road we trod,
More endless than desire.Far God,
Sigh with thy cruel voice, that fills
The soul with longing for dim hills
And faint horizons!  For there come
Grey moments of the antient dumb
Sickness of travel, when no song
Can cheer us; but the way seems long;
And one remembers  Ah! the beat
Of weary unreturning feet,
And songs of pilgrims unreturning! . . .
The fires we left are always burning
On the old shrines of home.  Our kin
Have built them temples, and therein
Pray to the Gods we know; and dwell
In little houses lovable,
Being happy (we remember how!)
And peaceful even to death O Thou,
God of all long desirous roaming,
Our hearts are sick of fruitless homing,
And crying after lost desire.
Hearten us onward! as with fire
Consuming dreams of other bliss.
The best Thou givest, giving this
Sufficient thing -- to travel still
Over the plain, beyond the hill,
Unhesitating through the shade,
Amid the silence unafraid,
Till, at some sudden turn, one sees
Against the black and muttering trees
Thine altar, wonderfully white,
Among the Forests of the Night.

TITLE The Song of the Beasts

RHYME a a b c c b a

Come away!  Come away!
Ye are sober and dull through the common day,
But now it is night!
It is shameful night, and God is asleep!
(Have you not felt the quick fires that creep
Through the hungry flesh, and the lust of delight,
And hot secrets of dreams that day cannot say?).

RHYME a a b c c b c

    The house is dumb;
The night calls out to you.        Come, ah, come!
Down the dim stairs, through the creaking door,
Naked, crawling on hands and feet
-- It is meet! it is meet!
Ye are men no longer, but less and more,
Beast and God. . . .  Down the lampless street,

RHYME a b a c b c

By little black ways, and secret places,
In the darkness and mire,
Faint laughter around, and evil faces
By the star-glint seen -- ah! follow with us!
For the darkness whispers a blind desire,
And the fingers of night are amorous.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d d c

Because God put His adamantine fate
 Between my sullen heart and its desire,
I swore that I would burst the Iron Gate,
 Rise up, and curse Him on His throne of fire.
Earth shuddered at my crown of blasphemy,
 But Love was as a flame about my feet;
 Proud up the Golden Stair I strode; and beat
Thrice on the Gate, and entered with a cry --

RHYME a b a c b c

All the great courts were quiet in the sun,
 And full of vacant echoes:  moss had grown
Over the glassy pavement, and begun
 To creep within the dusty council-halls.
An idle wind blew round an empty throne
 And stirred the heavy curtains on the walls.

TITLE Ante Aram

RHYME a b a b a b a b a b a b a b a b a b a

Before thy shrine I kneel, an unknown worshipper,	
 Chanting strange hymns to thee and sorrowful litanies,	
Incense of dirges, prayers that are as holy myrrh.	
Ah, goddess, on thy throne of tears and faint low sighs,
 Weary at last to theeward come the feet that err,	
And empty hearts grown tired of the world's vanities.	
How fair this cool deep silence to a wanderer		
 Deaf with the roar of winds along the open skies!	
Sweet, after sting and bitter kiss of sea-water,	
The pale Lethean wine within thy chalices!		
 I come before thee, I, too tired wanderer,		
To heed the horror of the shrine, the distant cries,	
And evil whispers in the gloom, or the swift whirr	
 Of terrible wings -- I, least of all thy votaries,	
With a faint hope to see the scented darkness stir,
And, parting, frame within its quiet mysteries
 One face, with lips than autumn-lilies tenderer,
And voice more sweet than the far plaint of viols is,
 Or the soft moan of any grey-eyed lute-player.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b a b a b

Opposite me two Germans snore and sweat.
 Through sullen swirling gloom we jolt and roar.
We have been here for ever:  even yet
 A dim watch tells two hours, two aeons, more.
The windows are tight-shut and slimy-wet
 With a night's foetor.  There are two hours more;
Two hours to dawn and Milan; two hours yet.
Opposite me two Germans sweat and snore. . . .

RHYME a a b b c c

One of them wakes, and spits, and sleeps again.
 The darkness shivers.  A wan light through the rain
Strikes on our faces, drawn and white.  Somewhere
 A new day sprawls; and, inside, the foul air
Is chill, and damp, and fouler than before. . . .
Opposite me two Germans sweat and snore.

TITLE The Call

RHYME a b a b

Out of the nothingness of sleep,
 The slow dreams of Eternity,
There was a thunder on the deep:
 I came, because you called to me.

RHYME a b a b

I broke the Night's primeval bars,
 I dared the old abysmal curse,
And flashed through ranks of frightened stars
 Suddenly on the universe!

RHYME a b a b

The eternal silences were broken;
 Hell became Heaven as I passed. --
What shall I give you as a token,
 A sign that we have met, at last?

RHYME a b a b

I'll break and forge the stars anew,
 Shatter the heavens with a song;
Immortal in my love for you,
 Because I love you, very strong.

RHYME a b a b

Your mouth shall mock the old and wise,
 Your laugh shall fill the world with flame,
I'll write upon the shrinking skies
 The scarlet splendour of your name,

RHYME a b a b

Till Heaven cracks, and Hell thereunder
 Dies in her ultimate mad fire,
And darkness falls, with scornful thunder,
 On dreams of men and men's desire.

RHYME a b a b

Then only in the empty spaces,
 Death, walking very silently,
Shall fear the glory of our faces
 Through all the dark infinity.

RHYME a b a b

So, clothed about with perfect love,
 The eternal end shall find us one,
Alone above the Night, above
 The dust of the dead gods, alone.

TITLE The Wayfarers

RHYME a b a b c c b a

Is it the hour?  We leave this resting-place
 Made fair by one another for a while.
Now, for a god-speed, one last mad embrace;
 The long road then, unlit by your faint smile.
Ah! the long road! and you so far away!
Oh, I'll remember! but . . . each crawling day
Will pale a little your scarlet lips, each mile
 Dull the dear pain of your remembered face.

RHYME a b c b a c

. . . Do you think there's a far border town, somewhere,
 The desert's edge, last of the lands we know,
    Some gaunt eventual limit of our light,
 In which I'll find you waiting; and we'll go
Together, hand in hand again, out there,
    Into the waste we know not, into the night?

TITLE The Beginning

RHYME a a b b b

Some day I shall rise and leave my friends
And seek you again through the world's far ends,
You whom I found so fair
(Touch of your hands and smell of your hair!),
My only god in the days that were.

RHYME a a *

My eager feet shall find you again,
Though the sullen years and the mark of pain
Have changed you wholly; for I shall know
(How could I forget having loved you so?),
In the sad half-light of evening,
The face that was all my sunrising.
So then at the ends of the earth I'll stand
And hold you fiercely by either hand,
And seeing your age and ashen hair
I'll curse the thing that once you were,
Because it is changed and pale and old
(Lips that were scarlet, hair that was gold!),

RHYME a a a

And I loved you before you were old and wise,
When the flame of youth was strong in your eyes,
-- And my heart is sick with memories.

TITLE Sonnet: Oh! Death Will Find Me, Long Before I Tire

RHYME a b a b

Oh! Death will find me, long before I tire
 Of watching you; and swing me suddenly
Into the shade and loneliness and mire
 Of the last land!  There, waiting patiently,

RHYME a b a b

One day, I think, I'll feel a cool wind blowing,
 See a slow light across the Stygian tide,
And hear the Dead about me stir, unknowing,
 And tremble.  And I shall know that you have died,

RHYME a b a b

And watch you, a broad-browed and smiling dream,
 Pass, light as ever, through the lightless host,
Quietly ponder, start, and sway, and gleam --
 Most individual and bewildering ghost! --

RHYME a a

And turn, and toss your brown delightful head
Amusedly, among the ancient Dead.

TITLE Sonnet: I Said I Splendidly Loved You; ItÕs Not True

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

I said I splendidly loved you; it's not true.
 Such long swift tides stir not a land-locked sea.
On gods or fools the high risk falls -- on you --
 The clean clear bitter-sweet that's not for me.
Love soars from earth to ecstasies unwist.
 Love is flung Lucifer-like from Heaven to Hell.
But -- there are wanderers in the middle mist,
 Who cry for shadows, clutch, and cannot tell
Whether they love at all, or, loving, whom:
 An old song's lady, a fool in fancy dress,
Or phantoms, or their own face on the gloom;
 For love of Love, or from heart's loneliness.
Pleasure's not theirs, nor pain.  They doubt, and sigh,
 And do not love at all.  Of these am I.

TITLE Success

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

I think if you had loved me when I wanted;
 If I'd looked up one day, and seen your eyes,
And found my wild sick blasphemous prayer granted,
 And your brown face, that's full of pity and wise,
Flushed suddenly; the white godhead in new fear
 Intolerably so struggling, and so shamed;
Most holy and far, if you'd come all too near,
 If earth had seen Earth's lordliest wild limbs tamed,
Shaken, and trapped, and shivering, for MY touch --
 Myself should I have slain? or that foul you?
But this the strange gods, who had given so much,
 To have seen and known you, this they might not do.
One last shame's spared me, one black word's unspoken;
 And I'm alone; and you have not awoken.

TITLE Dust

RHYME a b a b

When the white flame in us is gone,
 And we that lost the world's delight
Stiffen in darkness, left alone
 To crumble in our separate night;

RHYME a b a b

When your swift hair is quiet in death,
 And through the lips corruption thrust
Has stilled the labour of my breath --
 When we are dust, when we are dust! --

RHYME a b a b

Not dead, not undesirous yet,
 Still sentient, still unsatisfied,
We'll ride the air, and shine, and flit,
 Around the places where we died,

RHYME a b a b

And dance as dust before the sun,
 And light of foot, and unconfined,
Hurry from road to road, and run
 About the errands of the wind.

RHYME a b a b

And every mote, on earth or air,
 Will speed and gleam, down later days,
And like a secret pilgrim fare
 By eager and invisible ways,

RHYME a b a b

Nor ever rest, nor ever lie,
 Till, beyond thinking, out of view,
One mote of all the dust that's I
 Shall meet one atom that was you.

RHYME a b a b

Then in some garden hushed from wind,
 Warm in a sunset's afterglow,
The lovers in the flowers will find
 A sweet and strange unquiet grow

RHYME a b a b

Upon the peace; and, past desiring,
 So high a beauty in the air,
And such a light, and such a quiring,
 And such a radiant ecstasy there,

RHYME a b a b

They'll know not if it's fire, or dew,
 Or out of earth, or in the height,
Singing, or flame, or scent, or hue,
 Or two that pass, in light, to light,

RHYME a b a b

Out of the garden, higher, higher. . . .
 But in that instant they shall learn
The shattering ecstasy of our fire,
 And the weak passionless hearts will burn

RHYME a b a b

And faint in that amazing glow,
 Until the darkness close above;
And they will know -- poor fools, they'll know! --
 One moment, what it is to love.

TITLE Kindliness

RHYME a a b c c b d d e a e a e a

When love has changed to kindliness --	
Oh, love, our hungry lips, that press	
So tight that Time's an old god's dream	
Nodding in heaven, and whisper stuff	
Seven million years were not enough	
To think on after, make it seem		
Less than the breath of children playing,
A blasphemy scarce worth the saying,	
A sorry jest, "When love has grown	
To kindliness -- to kindliness!" . . .	
And yet -- the best that either's known	
Will change, and wither, and be less,	
At last, than comfort, or its own	
Remembrance.  And when some caress	

RHYME a a b c c b d b d e d e

Tendered in habit (once a flame
All heaven sang out to) wakes the shame
Unworded, in the steady eyes
We'll have, -- THAT day, what shall we do?
Being so noble, kill the two
Who've reached their second-best?  Being wise,
Break cleanly off, and get away.
Follow down other windier skies
New lures, alone?  Or shall we stay,
Since this is all we've known, content
In the lean twilight of such day,
And not remember, not lament?

RHYME a a *

That time when all is over, and
Hand never flinches, brushing hand;
And blood lies quiet, for all you're near;
And it's but spoken words we hear,
Where trumpets sang; when the mere skies
Are stranger and nobler than your eyes;
And flesh is flesh, was flame before;
And infinite hungers leap no more
In the chance swaying of your dress;
And love has changed to kindliness.

TITLE Mummia

RHYME a b a b

As those of old drank mummia
 To fire their limbs of lead,
Making dead kings from Africa
 Stand pandar to their bed;

RHYME a b a b

Drunk on the dead, and medicined
 With spiced imperial dust,
In a short night they reeled to find
 Ten centuries of lust.

RHYME a b a b

So I, from paint, stone, tale, and rhyme,
 Stuffed love's infinity,
And sucked all lovers of all time
 To rarify ecstasy.

RHYME a b a b

Helen's the hair shuts out from me
 Verona's livid skies;
Gypsy the lips I press; and see
 Two Antonys in your eyes.

RHYME a b a b

The unheard invisible lovely dead
 Lie with us in this place,
And ghostly hands above my head
 Close face to straining face;

RHYME a b a b

Their blood is wine along our limbs;
 Their whispering voices wreathe
Savage forgotten drowsy hymns
 Under the names we breathe;

RHYME a b a b

Woven from their tomb, and one with it,
 The night wherein we press;
Their thousand pitchy pyres have lit
 Your flaming nakedness.

RHYME a b a b

For the uttermost years have cried and clung
 To kiss your mouth to mine;
And hair long dust was caught, was flung,
 Hand shaken to hand divine,

RHYME a b a b

And Life has fired, and Death not shaded,
 All Time's uncounted bliss,
And the height o' the world has flamed and faded,
 Love, that our love be this!

TITLE The Fish

RHYME a a *

In a cool curving world he lies
And ripples with dark ecstasies.
The kind luxurious lapse and steal
Shapes all his universe to feel
And know and be; the clinging stream
Closes his memory, glooms his dream,
Who lips the roots o' the shore, and glides
Superb on unreturning tides.
Those silent waters weave for him
A fluctuant mutable world and dim,
Where wavering masses bulge and gape
Mysterious, and shape to shape
Dies momently through whorl and hollow,
And form and line and solid follow
Solid and line and form to dream
Fantastic down the eternal stream;
An obscure world, a shifting world,
Bulbous, or pulled to thin, or curled,
Or serpentine, or driving arrows,
Or serene slidings, or March narrows.
There slipping wave and shore are one,
And weed and mud.  No ray of sun,
But glow to glow fades down the deep
(As dream to unknown dream in sleep);
Shaken translucency illumes
The hyaline of drifting glooms;
The strange soft-handed depth subdues
Drowned colour there, but black to hues,
As death to living, decomposes --
Red darkness of the heart of roses,
Blue brilliant from dead starless skies,
And gold that lies behind the eyes,
The unknown unnameable sightless white
That is the essential flame of night,
Lustreless purple, hooded green,
The myriad hues that lie between
Darkness and darkness! . And all's one.
Gentle, embracing, quiet, dun,
The world he rests in, world he knows,
Perpetual curving.  Only -- grows
An eddy in that ordered falling,
A knowledge from the gloom, a calling
Weed in the wave, gleam in the mud --
The dark fire leaps along his blood;
Dateless and deathless, blind and still,
The intricate impulse works its will;
His woven world drops back; and he,
Sans providence, sans memory,
Unconscious and directly driven,
Fades to some dank sufficient heaven.

RHYME a a *

O world of lips, O world of laughter,
Where hope is fleet and thought flies after,
Of lights in the clear night, of cries
That drift along the wave and rise
Thin to the glittering stars above,
You know the hands, the eyes of love!
The strife of limbs, the sightless clinging,
The infinite distance, and the singing
Blown by the wind, a flame of sound,
The gleam, the flowers, and vast around
The horizon, and the heights above --
You know the sigh, the song of love!

RHYME a a *

But there the night is close, and there
Darkness is cold and strange and bare;
And the secret deeps are whisperless;
And rhythm is all deliciousness;
And joy is in the throbbing tide,
Whose intricate fingers beat and glide
In felt bewildering harmonies
Of trembling touch; and music is
The exquisite knocking of the blood.
Space is no more, under the mud;
His bliss is older than the sun.
Silent and straight the waters run.
The lights, the cries, the willows dim,
And the dark tide are one with him.

TITLE Thoughts on the Shape of the Human Body

RHYME a a *

How can we find? how can we rest? how can
We, being gods, win joy, or peace, being man?
We, the gaunt zanies of a witless Fate,
Who love the unloving and lover hate,
Forget the moment ere the moment slips,
Kiss with blind lips that seek beyond the lips,
Who want, and know not what we want, and cry
With crooked mouths for Heaven, and throw it by.
Love's for completeness!  No perfection grows
'Twixt leg, and arm, elbow, and ear, and nose,
And joint, and socket; but unsatisfied
Sprawling desires, shapeless, perverse, denied.
Finger with finger wreathes; we love, and gape,
Fantastic shape to mazed fantastic shape,
Straggling, irregular, perplexed, embossed,
Grotesquely twined, extravagantly lost
By crescive paths and strange protuberant ways
From sanity and from wholeness and from grace.
How can love triumph, how can solace be,
Where fever turns toward fever, knee toward knee?
Could we but fill to harmony, and dwell
Simple as our thought and as perfectible,
Rise disentangled from humanity
Strange whole and new into simplicity,
Grow to a radiant round love, and bear
Unfluctuant passion for some perfect sphere,
Love moon to moon unquestioning, and be
Like the star Lunisequa, steadfastly
Following the round clear orb of her delight,
Patiently ever, through the eternal night!

TITLE Flight

RHYME a b a b b

Voices out of the shade that cried,
 And long noon in the hot calm places,
And children's play by the wayside,
 And country eyes, and quiet faces --
 All these were round my steady paces.

RHYME a b a b b

Those that I could have loved went by me;
 Cool gardened homes slept in the sun;
I heard the whisper of water nigh me,
 Saw hands that beckoned, shone, were gone
 In the green and gold.  And I went on.

RHYME a b a b b

For if my echoing footfall slept,
 Soon a far whispering there'd be
Of a little lonely wind that crept
 From tree to tree, and distantly
 Followed me, followed me. . . .

RHYME a b a b b

But the blue vaporous end of day
 Brought peace, and pursuit baffled quite,
Where between pine-woods dipped the way.
 I turned, slipped in and out of sight.
 I trod as quiet as the night.

RHYME a b a b b

The pine-boles kept perpetual hush;
 And in the boughs wind never swirled.
I found a flowering lowly bush,
 And bowed, slid in, and sighed and curled,
 Hidden at rest from all the world.

RHYME a b a b b

Safe!  I was safe, and glad, I knew!
 Yet -- with cold heart and cold wet brows
I lay.  And the dark fell. . . .  There grew
 Meward a sound of shaken boughs;
 And ceased, above my intricate house;

RHYME a b a b b

And silence, silence, silence found me. . . .
 I felt the unfaltering movement creep
Among the leaves.  They shed around me
 Calm clouds of scent, that I did weep;
 And stroked my face.  I fell asleep.

TITLE The Hill

RHYME a b b a c d c d

Breathless, we flung us on the windy hill,
 Laughed in the sun, and kissed the lovely grass.
 You said, "Through glory and ecstasy we pass;
Wind, sun, and earth remain, the birds sing still,
When we are old, are old. . . ."  "And when we die
 All's over that is ours; and life burns on
Through other lovers, other lips," said I,
-- "Heart of my heart, our heaven is now, is won!"

RHYME a b b a c c

"We are Earth's best, that learnt her lesson here.
 Life is our cry.  We have kept the faith!" we said;
 "We shall go down with unreluctant tread
Rose-crowned into the darkness!" . . .  Proud we were,
And laughed, that had such brave true things to say.
-- And then you suddenly cried, and turned away.

TITLE The One Before the Last

RHYME a b a b

I dreamt I was in love again
 With the One Before the Last,
And smiled to greet the pleasant pain
 Of that innocent young past.

RHYME a b a b

But I jumped to feel how sharp had been
 The pain when it did live,
How the faded dreams of Nineteen-ten
 Were Hell in Nineteen-five.

RHYME a b a b

The boy's woe was as keen and clear,
 The boy's love just as true,
And the One Before the Last, my dear,
 Hurt quite as much as you.

RHYME a b a b

Sickly I pondered how the lover
 Wrongs the unanswering tomb,
And sentimentalizes over
 What earned a better doom.

RHYME a b a b

Gently he tombs the poor dim last time,
 Strews pinkish dust above,
And sighs, "The dear dead boyish pastime!
 But THIS -- ah, God! -- is Love!"

RHYME a b a b

-- Better oblivion hide dead true loves,
 Better the night enfold,
Than men, to eke the praise of new loves,
 Should lie about the old!

RHYME a b a b

Oh! bitter thoughts I had in plenty.
 But here's the worst of it --
I shall forget, in Nineteen-twenty,
 YOU ever hurt abit!

TITLE The Jolly Company

RHYME a b a b c c

The stars, a jolly company,
 I envied, straying late and lonely;
And cried upon their revelry:
 "O white companionship!  You only
In love, in faith unbroken dwell,
Friends radiant and inseparable!"

RHYME a b a b c c

Light-heart and glad they seemed to me
 And merry comrades (EVEN SO
GOD OUT OF HEAVEN MAY LAUGH TO SEE
 THE HAPPY CROWDS; AND NEVER KNOW
THAT IN HIS LONE OBSCURE DISTRESS
EACH WALKETH IN A WILDERNESS).

RHYME a b a b c c

But I, remembering, pitied well
 And loved them, who, with lonely light,
In empty infinite spaces dwell,
 Disconsolate.  For, all the night,
I heard the thin gnat-voices cry,
Star to faint star, across the sky.

TITLE The Life Beyond

RHYME a b a c b b d d b e c f e f c

HE wakes, who never thought to wake again,	
  Who held the end was Death. He opens eyes	
Slowly, to one long livid oozing plain	
  Closed down by the strange eyeless heavens.	
  He lies;	        
  And waits; and once in timeless sick surmise	
Through the dead air heaves up an unknown hand,	
Like a dry branch. No life is in that land,	
  Himself not lives, but is a thing that cries;	
An unmeaning point upon the mud; a speck	       
  Of moveless horror; an Immortal One	
Cleansed of the world, sentient and dead; a fly	
  Fast-stuck in grey sweat on a corpseÕs neck.	
I though when love for you died, I should die.	
ItÕs dead. Alone, most strangely, I live on.

TITLE Lines Written in the Belief That the Ancient Roman Festival of the Dead Was Called Ambarvalia

RHYME a b c b

Swings the way still by hollow and hill,
 And all the world's a song;
"She's far," it sings me, "but fair," it rings me,
 "Quiet," it laughs, "and strong!"

RHYME a b c b

Oh! spite of the miles and years between us,
 Spite of your chosen part,
I do remember; and I go
 With laughter in my heart.

RHYME a b c b

So above the little folk that know not,
 Out of the white hill-town,
High up I clamber; and I remember;
 And watch the day go down.

RHYME a b c b

Gold is my heart, and the world's golden,
 And one peak tipped with light;
And the air lies still about the hill
 With the first fear of night;

RHYME a b c b

Till mystery down the soundless valley
 Thunders, and dark is here;
And the wind blows, and the light goes,
 And the night is full of fear,

RHYME a b c b

And I know, one night, on some far height,
 In the tongue I never knew,
I yet shall hear the tidings clear
 From them that were friends of you.

RHYME a b c b

They'll call the news from hill to hill,
 Dark and uncomforted,
Earth and sky and the winds; and I
 Shall know that you are dead.

RHYME a b c b

I shall not hear your trentals,
 Nor eat your arval bread;
For the kin of you will surely do
 Their duty by the dead.

RHYME a b c b

Their little dull greasy eyes will water;
 They'll paw you, and gulp afresh.
They'll sniffle and weep, and their thoughts will creep
 Like flies on the cold flesh.

RHYME a b c b

They will put pence on your grey eyes,
 Bind up your fallen chin,
And lay you straight, the fools that loved you
 Because they were your kin.

They will praise all the bad about you,
 And hush the good away,
And wonder how they'll do without you,
 And then they'll go away.

RHYME a b c b

But quieter than one sleeping,
 And stranger than of old,
You will not stir for weeping,
 You will not mind the cold;

RHYME a b c b

But through the night the lips will laugh not,
 The hands will be in place,
And at length the hair be lying still
 About the quiet face.

RHYME a b c b

With snuffle and sniff and handkerchief,
 And dim and decorous mirth,
With ham and sherry, they'll meet to bury
 The lordliest lass of earth.

RHYME a b c b

The little dead hearts will tramp ungrieving
 Behind lone-riding you,
The heart so high, the heart so living,
 Heart that they never knew.

RHYME a b c b

I shall not hear your trentals,
 Nor eat your arval bread,
Nor with smug breath tell lies of death
 To the unanswering dead.

RHYME a b c b

With snuffle and sniff and handkerchief,
 The folk who loved you not
Will bury you, and go wondering
 Back home.  And you will rot.

RHYME a b c b

But laughing and half-way up to heaven,
 With wind and hill and star,
I yet shall keep, before I sleep,
 Your Ambarvalia.

TITLE Dead MenÕs Love

RHYME a b a b c c d d

There was a damned successful Poet;
 There was a Woman like the Sun.
And they were dead.  They did not know it.
 They did not know their time was done.
    They did not know his hymns
    Were silence; and her limbs,
    That had served Love so well,
    Dust, and a filthy smell.

RHYME a b a b c c d d

And so one day, as ever of old,
 Hands out, they hurried, knee to knee;
On fire to cling and kiss and hold
 And, in the other's eyes, to see
    Each his own tiny face,
    And in that long embrace
    Feel lip and breast grow warm
    To breast and lip and arm.

RHYME a b a b c c d d

So knee to knee they sped again,
 And laugh to laugh they ran, I'm told,
Across the streets of Hell  And then
 They suddenly felt the wind blow cold,
    And knew, so closely pressed,
    Chill air on lip and breast,
    And, with a sick surprise,
    The emptiness of eyes.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

Here, where love's stuff is body, arm and side
 Are stabbing-sweet 'gainst chair and lamp and wall.
In every touch more intimate meanings hide;
 And flaming brains are the white heart of all.

RHYME a b a b

Here, million pulses to one centre beat:
 Closed in by men's vast friendliness, alone,
Two can be drunk with solitude, and meet
 On the sheer point where sense with knowing's one.

RHYME a b a b

Here the green-purple clanging royal night,
 And the straight lines and silent walls of town,
And roar, and glare, and dust, and myriad white
 Undying passers, pinnacle and crown

RHYME a b a b

Intensest heavens between close-lying faces
 By the lamp's airless fierce ecstatic fire;
And we've found love in little hidden places,
 Under great shades, between the mist and mire.

RHYME a b a b

Stay! though the woods are quiet, and you've heard
 Night creep along the hedges.  Never go
Where tangled foliage shrouds the crying bird,
 And the remote winds sigh, and waters flow!

RHYME a b a b

Lest -- as our words fall dumb on windless noons,
 Or hearts grow hushed and solitary, beneath
Unheeding stars and unfamiliar moons,
 Or boughs bend over, close and quiet as death, --

RHYME a b a b

Unconscious and unpassionate and still,
 Cloud-like we lean and stare as bright leaves stare,
And gradually along the stranger hill
 Our unwalled loves thin out on vacuous air,

RHYME a b a b

And suddenly there's no meaning in our kiss,
 And your lit upward face grows, where we lie,
Lonelier and dreadfuller than sunlight is,
 And dumb and mad and eyeless like the sky.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b c c

For moveless limbs no pity I crave,
 That never were swift!  Still all I prize,
Laughter and thought and friends, I have;
 No fool to heave luxurious sighs
For the woods and hills that I never knew.
The more excellent way's yet mine!  And you

RHYME a b a b c c

Flower-laden come to the clean white cell,
 And we talk as ever -- am I not the same?
With our hearts we love, immutable,
 You without pity, I without shame.
We talk as of old; as of old you go
Out under the sky, and laughing, I know,

RHYME a b a b c c

Flit through the streets, your heart all me;
 Till you gain the world beyond the town.
Then -- I fade from your heart, quietly;
 And your fleet steps quicken.  The strong down
Smiles you welcome there; the woods that love you
Close lovely and conquering arms above you.

RHYME a b a b c c d d

O ever-moving, O lithe and free!
 Fast in my linen prison I press
On impassable bars, or emptily
 Laugh in my great loneliness.
And still in the white neat bed I strive
Most impotently against that gyve;
Being less now than a thought, even,
To you alone with your hills and heaven.

TITLE Menelaus and Helen

RHYME a b b a c d d c

Hot through Troy's ruin Menelaus broke
 To Priam's palace, sword in hand, to sate
 On that adulterous whore a ten years' hate
And a king's honour.  Through red death, and smoke,
And cries, and then by quieter ways he strode,
 Till the still innermost chamber fronted him.
 He swung his sword, and crashed into the dim
Luxurious bower, flaming like a god.

RHYME a b c c b a

High sat white Helen, lonely and serene.
 He had not remembered that she was so fair,
And that her neck curved down in such a way;
And he felt tired.  He flung the sword away,
 And kissed her feet, and knelt before her there,
The perfect Knight before the perfect Queen.

RHYME a b b a a c c a

So far the poet.  How should he behold
 That journey home, the long connubial years?
 He does not tell you how white Helen bears
Child on legitimate child, becomes a scold,
Haggard with virtue.  Menelaus bold
 Waxed garrulous, and sacked a hundred Troys
 'Twixt noon and supper.  And her golden voice
Got shrill as he grew deafer.  And both were old.

RHYME a b a b c c

Often he wonders why on earth he went
 Troyward, or why poor Paris ever came.
Oft she weeps, gummy-eyed and impotent;
 Her dry shanks twitch at Paris' mumbled name.
So Menelaus nagged; and Helen cried;
And Paris slept on by Scamander side.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d c d

How should I know?  The enormous wheels of will
 Drove me cold-eyed on tired and sleepless feet.
Night was void arms and you a phantom still,
 And day your far light swaying down the street.
As never fool for love, I starved for you;
 My throat was dry and my eyes hot to see.
Your mouth so lying was most heaven in view,
 And your remembered smell most agony.

RHYME a b c a b c

Love wakens love!  I felt your hot wrist shiver
 And suddenly the mad victory I planned
  Flashed real, in your burning bending head. . . .
My conqueror's blood was cool as a deep river
 In shadow; and my heart beneath your hand
  Quieter than a dead man on a bed.

TITLE 

RHYME a a *

When I see you, who were so wise and cool,
Gazing with silly sickness on that fool
You've given your love to, your adoring hands
Touch his so intimately that each understands,
I know, most hidden things; and when I know
Your holiest dreams yield to the stupid bow
Of his red lips, and that the empty grace
Of those strong legs and arms, that rosy face,
Has beaten your heart to such a flame of love,
That you have given him every touch and move,
Wrinkle and secret of you, all your life,
-- Oh! then I know I'm waiting, lover-wife,
For the great time when love is at a close,
And all its fruit's to watch the thickening nose
And sweaty neck and dulling face and eye,
That are yours, and you, most surely, till you die!
Day after day you'll sit with him and note
The greasier tie, the dingy wrinkling coat;
As prettiness turns to pomp, and strength to fat,
And love, love, love to habit!  And after that,
When all that's fine in man is at an end,
And you, that loved young life and clean, must tend
A foul sick fumbling dribbling body and old,
When his rare lips hang flabby and can't hold
Slobber, and you're enduring that worst thing,
Senility's queasy furtive love-making,
And searching those dear eyes for human meaning,
Propping the bald and helpless head, and cleaning
A scrap that life's flung by, and love's forgotten, --
Then you'll be tired; and passion dead and rotten;
And he'll be dirty, dirty!  O lithe and free
And lightfoot, that the poor heart cries to see,
That's how I'll see your man and you! --  But you
-- Oh, when THAT time comes, you'll be dirty too!

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b

My restless blood now lies a-quiver,
 Knowing that always, exquisitely,
This April twilight on the river
 Stirs anguish in the heart of me.

RHYME a b a b

For the fast world in that rare glimmer
 Puts on the witchery of a dream,
The straight grey buildings, richly dimmer,
 The fiery windows, and the stream

RHYME a b a b

With willows leaning quietly over,
 The still ecstatic fading skies . . .
And all these, like a waiting lover,
 Murmur and gleam, lift lustrous eyes,

RHYME a b a b

Drift close to me, and sideways bending
 Whisper delicious words.  But I
Stretch terrible hands, uncomprehending,
 Shaken with love; and laugh; and cry.

RHYME a b a b

My agony made the willows quiver;
 I heard the knocking of my heart
Die loudly down the windless river,
 I heard the pale skies fall apart,

RHYME a b a b

And the shrill stars' unmeaning laughter,
 And my voice with the vocal trees
Weeping.  And Hatred followed after,
 Shrilling madly down the breeze.

RHYME a b a b

In peace from the wild heart of clamour,
 A flower in moonlight, she was there,
Was rippling down white ways of glamour
 Quietly laid on wave and air.

RHYME a b a b

Her passing left no leaf a-quiver.
 Pale flowers wreathed her white, white brows.
Her feet were silence on the river;
 And "Hush!" she said, between the boughs.

TITLE Song

RHYME a b a b c d c d

ÒOH! Love,Ó they said, Òis King of Kings,	
  And Triumph is his crown.	
Earth fades in flame before his wings,	
  And Sun and Moon bow down.ÓÑ	
But that, I knew, would never do;	        
  And Heaven is all too high.	
So whenever I meet a Queen, I said,	
  I will not catch her eye.	
  
RHYME a b a b c d c d

ÒOh! Love,Ó they said, and ÒLove,Ó they said,	
  ÒThe gift of Love is this;	       
A crown of thorns about thy head,	
  And vinegar to thy kiss!ÓÑ	
But Tragedy is not for me;	
  And IÕm content to be gay.	
So whenever I spied a Tragic Lady,	       
  I went another way.	
  
RHYME a b a b c d c d

And so I never feared to see	
  You wander down the street,	
Or come across the fields to me	
  On ordinary feet.	       
For what theyÕd never told me of,	
  And what I never knew;	
It was that all the time, my love,	
  Love would be merely you.	

TITLE Dining-Room Tea

RHYME a a *

When you were there, and you, and you,
Happiness crowned the night; I too,
Laughing and looking, one of all,
I watched the quivering lamplight fall
On plate and flowers and pouring tea
And cup and cloth; and they and we
Flung all the dancing moments by
With jest and glitter.  Lip and eye
Flashed on the glory, shone and cried,
Improvident, unmemoried;
And fitfully and like a flame
The light of laughter went and came.
Proud in their careless transience moved
The changing faces that I loved.

RHYME a a *

Till suddenly, and otherwhence,
I looked upon your innocence.
For lifted clear and still and strange
From the dark woven flow of change
Under a vast and starless sky
I saw the immortal moment lie.
One instant I, an instant, knew
As God knows all.  And it and you

RHYME  a a a

I, above Time, oh, blind! could see
In witless immortality.
I saw the marble cup; the tea,

RHYME a a *

Hung on the air, an amber stream;
I saw the fire's unglittering gleam,
The painted flame, the frozen smoke.
No more the flooding lamplight broke
On flying eyes and lips and hair;
But lay, but slept unbroken there,
On stiller flesh, and body breathless,
And lips and laughter stayed and deathless,
And words on which no silence grew.
Light was more alive than you.

RHYME a a *

For suddenly, and otherwhence,
I looked on your magnificence.
I saw the stillness and the light,
And you, august, immortal, white,
Holy and strange; and every glint
Posture and jest and thought and tint
Freed from the mask of transiency,
Triumphant in eternity,

RHYME a a *

                   Dazed at length
Human eyes grew, mortal strength
Wearied; and Time began to creep.
Change closed about me like a sleep.
Light glinted on the eyes I loved.
The cup was filled.  The bodies moved.
The drifting petal came to ground.
The laughter chimed its perfect round.
The broken syllable was ended.
And I, so certain and so friended,
How could I cloud, or how distress,
The heaven of your unconsciousness?
Or shake at Time's sufficient spell,
Stammering of lights unutterable?
The eternal holiness of you,
The timeless end, you never knew,
The peace that lay, the light that shone.
You never knew that I had gone
A million miles away, and stayed
A million years.  The laughter played
Unbroken round me; and the jest
Flashed on.  And we that knew the best
Down wonderful hours grew happier yet.
I sang at heart, and talked, and eat,
And lived from laugh to laugh, I too,
When you were there, and you, and you.

TITLE The Goddess in the Wood
  
RHYME a b b a c d d c

IN a flowered dell the Lady Venus stood,	
  Amazed with sorrow. Down the morning one	
  Far golden horn in the gold of trees and sun	
Rang out; and held; and died.É She thought the wood	
Grew quieter. Wing, and leaf, and pool of light	        
  Forgot to dance. Dumb lay the unfalling stream;	
  Life one eternal instant rose in dream	
Clear out of time, poised on a golden height.É	
  
RHYME a b c a b c

Till a swift terror broke the abrupt hour.	
The gold waves purled amidst the green above her;	       
  And a bird sang. With one sharp-taken breath,	
By sunlit branches and unshaken flower,	
The immortal limbs flashed to the human lover,	
  And the immortal eyes to look on death.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b c d c d

The damned ship lurched and slithered.  Quiet and quick
 My cold gorge rose; the long sea rolled; I knew
I must think hard of something, or be sick;
 And could think hard of only one thing -- YOU!
You, you alone could hold my fancy ever!
 And with you memories come, sharp pain, and dole.
Now there's a choice -- heartache or tortured liver!
 A sea-sick body, or a you-sick soul!

RHYME a b a b c c

Do I forget you?  Retchings twist and tie me,
 Old meat, good meals, brown gobbets, up I throw.
Do I remember?  Acrid return and slimy,
 The sobs and slobber of a last years woe.
And still the sick ship rolls.  'Tis hard, I tell ye,
To choose 'twixt love and nausea, heart and belly.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a

All night the ways of Heaven were desolate,
 Long roads across a gleaming empty sky.
 Outcast and doomed and driven, you and I,
Alone, serene beyond all love or hate,
Terror or triumph, were content to wait,
 We, silent and all-knowing.  Suddenly
 Swept through the heaven low-crouching from on high,
One horseman, downward to the earth's low gate.

RHYME a b c b a c

Oh, perfect from the ultimate height of living,
 Lightly we turned, through wet woods blossom-hung,
Into the open.  Down the supernal roads,
 With plumes a-tossing, purple flags far flung,
Rank upon rank, unbridled, unforgiving,
 Thundered the black battalions of the Gods.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b b c b c

Through my heart's palace Thoughts unnumbered throng;
 And there, most quiet and, as a child, most wise,
High-throned you sit, and gracious.  All day long
 Great Hopes gold-armoured, jester Fantasies,
 And pilgrim Dreams, and little beggar Sighs,
Bow to your benediction, go their way.
 And the grave jewelled courtier Memories
Worship and love and tend you, all the day.

RHYME a b c b a c

But when I sleep, and all my thoughts go straying,
 When the high session of the day is ended,
And darkness comes; then, with the waning light,
 By lilied maidens on your way attended,
Proud from the wonted throne, superbly swaying,
 You, like a queen, pass out into the night.

TITLE ChoriambicsÑI
  
RHYME a a * 

AH! not now, when desire burns, and the wind calls, and the suns of spring	
Light-foot dance in the woods, whisper of life, woo me to wayfaring;	
Ah! not now should you come, now when the road beckons, and good friends call,	
Where are songs to be sung, fights to be fought, yea! and the best of all,	
Love, on myriad lips fairer than yours, kisses you could not give!	        
Dearest, why should I mourn, whimper, and whine, I that have yet to live?	
Sorrow will I forget, tears for the best, love on the lips of you,	
Now, when dawn in the blood wakes, and the sun laughs up the eastern blue;	
IÕll forget and be glad! Only at length, dear, when the great day ends,	
When love dies with the last light, and the last song has been sung, and friends
All are perished, and gloom strides on the heaven: then, as alone I lie,	
ÕMid DeathÕs gathering winds, frightened and dumb, sick for the past, may I	
Feel you suddenly there, cool at my brow; then may I hear the peace	
Of your voice at the last, whispering love, calling, ere all can cease	
In the silence of death; then may I see dimly, and know, a space,	
Bending over me, last light in the dark, once, as of old, your face.

TITLE ChoriambicsÑII
  
RHYME a a *

HERE the flame that was ash, shrine that was void, lost in the haunted wood,	
I have tended and loved, year upon year, I in the solitude	
Waiting, quiet and glad-eyed in the dark, knowing that once a gleam	
Glowed and went through the wood. Still I abode strong in a golden dream,	
Unrecaptured. For I, I that had faith, knew that a face would glance	
One day, white in the dim woods, and a voice call, and a radiance	
Fill the grove, and the fire suddenly leapÉ and, in the heart of it,	
End of labouring, you! Therefore I kept ready the altar, lit	
The flame, burning apart. Face of my dreams vainly in vision white	
Gleaming down to me, lo! hopeless I rise now. For about midnight	
Whispers grew through the wood suddenly, strange cries in the boughs above	
Grated, cries like a laugh. Silent and black then through the sacred grove	
Great birds flew, as a dream, troubling the leaves, passing at length. I knew 	
Long expected and long loved, that afar, God of the dim wood, you	
Somewhere lay, as a child sleeping, a child suddenly reft from mirth,	
White and wonderful yet, white in your youth, stretched upon foreign earth,	
God, immortal and dead!	Therefore I go; never to rest, or win	
Peace, and worship of you more, and the dumb wood and the shrine therein.	

TITLE Desertion

RHYME a a *

So light we were, so right we were, so fair faith shone,
And the way was laid so certainly, that, when I'd gone,
What dumb thing looked up at you?  Was it something heard,
Or a sudden cry, that meekly and without a word
You broke the faith, and strangely, weakly, slipped apart.
You gave in -- you, the proud of heart, unbowed of heart!
Was this, friend, the end of all that we could do?
And have you found the best for you, the rest for you?
Did you learn so suddenly (and I not by!)
Some whispered story, that stole the glory from the sky,
And ended all the splendid dream, and made you go
So dully from the fight we know, the light we know?

RHYME a a *

O faithless! the faith remains, and I must pass
Gay down the way, and on alone.  Under the grass
You wait; the breeze moves in the trees, and stirs, and calls,
And covers you with white petals, with light petals.
There it shall crumble, frail and fair, under the sun,
O little heart, your brittle heart; till day be done,
And the shadows gather, falling light, and, white with dew,
Whisper, and weep; and creep to you.  Good sleep to you!

TITLE Peace

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Now, God be thanked Who has matched us with His hour,
 And caught our youth, and wakened us from sleeping,
With hand made sure, clear eye, and sharpened power,
 To turn, as swimmers into cleanness leaping,
Glad from a world grown old and cold and weary,
 Leave the sick hearts that honour could not move,
And half-men, and their dirty songs and dreary,
 And all the little emptiness of love!

RHYME a b c a b c

Oh! we, who have known shame, we have found release there,
 Where there's no ill, no grief, but sleep has mending,
  Naught broken save this body, lost but breath;
Nothing to shake the laughing heart's long peace there
 But only agony, and that has ending;
  And the worst friend and enemy is but Death.

TITLE Safety

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

Dear! of all happy in the hour, most blest
 He who has found our hid security,
Assured in the dark tides of the world that rest,
 And heard our word, `Who is so safe as we?'
We have found safety with all things undying,
 The winds, and morning, tears of men and mirth,
The deep night, and birds singing, and clouds flying,
 And sleep, and freedom, and the autumnal earth.
We have built a house that is not for Time's throwing.
 We have gained a peace unshaken by pain for ever.
War knows no power.  Safe shall be my going,
 Secretly armed against all death's endeavour;
Safe though all safety's lost; safe where men fall;
And if these poor limbs die, safest of all.

TITLE The Dead

RHYME a b b a c d d c

Blow out, you bugles, over the rich Dead!
 There's none of these so lonely and poor of old,
 But, dying, has made us rarer gifts than gold.
These laid the world away; poured out the red
Sweet wine of youth; gave up the years to be
 Of work and joy, and that unhoped serene,
 That men call age; and those who would have been,
Their sons, they gave, their immortality.

RHYME a b a c b c

Blow, bugles, blow!  They brought us, for our dearth,
 Holiness, lacked so long, and Love, and Pain.
Honour has come back, as a king, to earth,
 And paid his subjects with a royal wage;
And Nobleness walks in our ways again;
 And we have come into our heritage.

TITLE The Dead

RHYME a b a b c d c d

These hearts were woven of human joys and cares,
 Washed marvellously with sorrow, swift to mirth.
The years had given them kindness.  Dawn was theirs,
 And sunset, and the colours of the earth.
These had seen movement, and heard music; known
 Slumber and waking; loved; gone proudly friended;
Felt the quick stir of wonder; sat alone;
 Touched flowers and furs and cheeks.  All this is ended.

RHYME a a b c b c

There are waters blown by changing winds to laughter
And lit by the rich skies, all day.  And after,
 Frost, with a gesture, stays the waves that dance
And wandering loveliness.  He leaves a white
 Unbroken glory, a gathered radiance,
A width, a shining peace, under the night.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d c d

If I should die, think only this of me:
 That there's some corner of a foreign field
That is for ever England.  There shall be
 In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
 Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam,
A body of England's, breathing English air,
 Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.

RHYME a b c a b c

And think, this heart, all evil shed away,
 A pulse in the eternal mind, no less
  Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given;
Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day;
 And laughter, learnt of friends; and gentleness,
  In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c

When colour goes home into the eyes,
 And lights that shine are shut again
With dancing girls and sweet birds' cries
 Behind the gateways of the brain;
And that no-place which gave them birth, shall close
The rainbow and the rose: --

RHYME a b a b c c d d

Still may Time hold some golden space
 Where I'll unpack that scented store
Of song and flower and sky and face,
 And count, and touch, and turn them o'er,
Musing upon them; as a mother, who
Has watched her children all the rich day through
Sits, quiet-handed, in the fading light,
When children sleep, ere night.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c d d

Mamua, when our laughter ends,
And hearts and bodies, brown as white,
Are dust about the doors of friends,
Or scent ablowing down the night,
Then, oh! then, the wise agree,
Comes our immortality.
Mamua, there waits a land
Hard for us to understand.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e e

Out of time, beyond the sun,
All are one in Paradise,
You and Pupure are one,
And Tau, and the ungainly wise.
There the Eternals are, and there
The Good, the Lovely, and the True,
And Types, whose earthly copies were
The foolish broken things we knew;
There is the Face, whose ghosts we are;
The real, the never-setting Star;

RHYME a b c a b d d c d

And the Flower, of which we love
Faint and fading shadows here;
Never a tear, but only Grief;
Dance, but not the limbs that move;
Songs in Song shall disappear;
Instead of lovers, Love shall be;
For hearts, Immutability;
And there, on the Ideal Reef,
Thunders the Everlasting Sea!

RHYME a a b a 

And my laughter, and my pain,	
Shall home to the Eternal Brain.	
And all lovely things, they say,	       
Meet in Loveliness again;

RHYME a b a c c	

MiriÕs laugh, TepoÕs feet,	
And the hands of Matua,	
Stars and sunlight there shall meet,
CoralÕs hues and rainbows there,	       
And TeraÕs braided hair;	

RHYME a b a b

And with the starred tiareÕs white,	
And white birds in the dark ravine,	
And flamboyants ablaze at night,	
And jewels, and eveningÕs after-green,	   

RHYME a a b c b c    

And dawns of pearl and gold and red,	
Mamua, your lovelier head!	
And thereÕll no more be one who dreams	
Under the ferns, of crumbling stuff,	
Eyes of illusion, mouth that seems,	       
All time-entangled human love.	

RHYME a b b a c c d e d e

And youÕll no longer swing and sway	
Divinely down the scented shade,	
Where feet to Ambulation fade,	
And moons are lost in endless Day.	       
How shall we wind these wreaths of ours,	
Where there are neither heads nor flowers?	
Oh, HeavenÕs Heaven!Ñbut weÕll be missing	
The palms, and sunlight, and the south;	
And thereÕs an end, I think, of kissing,	       
When our mouths are one with Mouth.
  
RHYME a b c b c d b d e e b

  Ta here, Mamua,	
Crown the hair, and come away!	
Hear the calling of the moon,	
And the whispering scents that stray	       
About the idle warm lagoon.	
Hasten, hand in human hand,	
Down the dark, the flowered way,	
Along the whiteness of the sand,	
And in the waterÕs soft caress,	       
Wash the mind of foolishness,	
Mamua, until the day.	

RHYME a b a b c d c d e e

Spend the glittering moonlight there	
Pursuing down the soundless deep	
Limbs that gleam and shadowy hair,	       
Or floating lazy, half-asleep.	
Dive and double and follow after,	
Snare in flowers, and kiss, and call,	
With lips that fade, and human laughter	
And faces individual,	       
Well this side of Paradise!
ThereÕs little comfort in the wise.

TITLE Retrospect

RHYME a a *

In your arms was still delight,
Quiet as a street at night;
And thoughts of you, I do remember,
Were green leaves in a darkened chamber,
Were dark clouds in a moonless sky.
Love, in you, went passing by,
Penetrative, remote, and rare,
Like a bird in the wide air,
And, as the bird, it left no trace
In the heaven of your face.
In your stupidity I found
The sweet hush after a sweet sound.
All about you was the light
That dims the greying end of night;
Desire was the unrisen sun,
Joy the day not yet begun,
With tree whispering to tree,
Without wind, quietly.
Wisdom slept within your hair,
And Long-Suffering was there,
And, in the flowing of your dress,
Undiscerning Tenderness.
And when you thought, it seemed to me,
Infinitely, and like a sea,
About the slight world you had known
Your vast unconsciousness was thrown. . . .

RHYME a a *

O haven without wave or tide!
Silence, in which all songs have died!
Holy book, where hearts are still!
And home at length under the hill!
O mother quiet, breasts of peace,
Where love itself would faint and cease!
O infinite deep I never knew,
I would come back, come back to you,
Find you, as a pool unstirred,
Kneel down by you, and never a word,
Lay my head, and nothing said,
In your hands, ungarlanded;
And a long watch you would keep;
And I should sleep, and I should sleep!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

I have been so great a lover:  filled my days
So proudly with the splendour of Love's praise,
The pain, the calm, and the astonishment,
Desire illimitable, and still content,
And all dear names men use, to cheat despair,
For the perplexed and viewless streams that bear
Our hearts at random down the dark of life.
Now, ere the unthinking silence on that strife
Steals down, I would cheat drowsy Death so far,
My night shall be remembered for a star
That outshone all the suns of all men's days.
Shall I not crown them with immortal praise
Whom I have loved, who have given me, dared with me
High secrets, and in darkness knelt to see
The inenarrable godhead of delight?
Love is a flame; -- we have beaconed the world's night.
A city: -- and we have built it, these and I.
An emperor: -- we have taught the world to die.
So, for their sakes I loved, ere I go hence,
And the high cause of Love's magnificence,
And to keep loyalties young, I'll write those names
Golden for ever, eagles, crying flames,
And set them as a banner, that men may know,
To dare the generations, burn, and blow
Out on the wind of Time, shining and streaming. . . .
These I have loved:  White plates and cups, clean-gleaming,
Ringed with blue lines; and feathery, faery dust;
Wet roofs, beneath the lamp-light; the strong crust
Of friendly bread; and many-tasting food;
Rainbows; and the blue bitter smoke of wood;
And radiant raindrops couching in cool flowers;
And flowers themselves, that sway through sunny hours,
Dreaming of moths that drink them under the moon;
Then, the cool kindliness of sheets, that soon
Smooth away trouble; and the rough male kiss
Of blankets; grainy wood; live hair that is
Shining and free; blue-massing clouds; the keen
Unpassioned beauty of a great machine;
The benison of hot water; furs to touch;
The good smell of old clothes; and other such --
The comfortable smell of friendly fingers,
Hair's fragrance, and the musty reek that lingers
About dead leaves and last year's ferns Dear names,
And thousand other throng to me!  Royal flames;
Sweet water's dimpling laugh from tap or spring;
Holes in the ground; and voices that do sing;
Voices in laughter, too; and body's pain,
Soon turned to peace; and the deep-panting train;
Firm sands; the little dulling edge of foam
That browns and dwindles as the wave goes home;
And washen stones, gay for an hour; the cold
Graveness of iron; moist black earthen mould;
Sleep; and high places; footprints in the dew;
And oaks; and brown horse-chestnuts, glossy-new;
And new-peeled sticks; and shining pools on grass; --
All these have been my loves.  And these shall pass,
Whatever passes not, in the great hour,
Nor all my passion, all my prayers, have power
To hold them with me through the gate of Death.
They'll play deserter, turn with the traitor breath,
Break the high bond we made, and sell Love's trust
And sacramented covenant to the dust.
---- Oh, never a doubt but, somewhere, I shall wake,
And give what's left of love again, and make
New friends, now strangers.  But the best I've known,
Stays here, and changes, breaks, grows old, is blown
About the winds of the world, and fades from brains
Of living men, and dies.  Nothing remains.
O dear my loves, O faithless, once again
This one last gift I give:  that after men
Shall know, and later lovers, far-removed,
Praise you, "All these were lovely"; say, "He loved."

TITLE Heaven

RHYME a a *

Fish (fly-replete, in depth of June,
Dawdling away their wat'ry noon)
Ponder deep wisdom, dark or clear,
Each secret fishy hope or fear.
Fish say, they have their Stream and Pond;
But is there anything Beyond?
This life cannot be All, they swear,
For how unpleasant, if it were!
One may not doubt that, somehow, Good
Shall come of Water and of Mud;
And, sure, the reverent eye must see
A Purpose in Liquidity.
We darkly know, by Faith we cry,
The future is not Wholly Dry.
Mud unto mud! -- Death eddies near --
Not here the appointed End, not here!
But somewhere, beyond Space and Time.
Is wetter water, slimier slime!
And there (they trust) there swimmeth One
Who swam ere rivers were begun,
Immense, of fishy form and mind,
Squamous, omnipotent, and kind;
And under that Almighty Fin,
The littlest fish may enter in.
Oh! never fly conceals a hook,
Fish say, in the Eternal Brook,
But more than mundane weeds are there,
And mud, celestially fair;
Fat caterpillars drift around,
And Paradisal grubs are found;
Unfading moths, immortal flies,
And the worm that never dies.
And in that Heaven of all their wish,
There shall be no more land, say fish.

TITLE Doubts

RHYME a b a b c b a c

When she sleeps, her soul, I know,
Goes a wanderer on the air,
Wings where I may never go,
Leaves her lying, still and fair,
Waiting, empty, laid aside,
Like a dress upon a chair. . . .
This I know, and yet I know
Doubts that will not be denied.

RHYME a a b b c d c d

For if the soul be not in place,
What has laid trouble in her face?
And, sits there nothing ware and wise
Behind the curtains of her eyes,
What is it, in the self's eclipse,
Shadows, soft and passingly,
About the corners of her lips,
The smile that is essential she?

RHYME a a

And if the spirit be not there,
Why is fragrance in the hair?

TITLE

RHYME a a *

"Oh love is fair, and love is rare;" my dear one she said,
"But love goes lightly over."  I bowed her foolish head,
And kissed her hair and laughed at her.  Such a child was she;
So new to love, so true to love, and she spoke so bitterly.

RHYME a a *

But there's wisdom in women, of more than they have known,
And thoughts go blowing through them, are wiser than their own,
Or how should my dear one, being ignorant and young,
Have cried on love so bitterly, with so true a tongue?

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

I have peace to weigh your worth, now all is over,
 But if to praise or blame you, cannot say.
For, who decries the loved, decries the lover;
 Yet what man lauds the thing he's thrown away?

RHYME a b a b

Be you, in truth, this dull, slight, cloudy naught,
 The more fool I, so great a fool to adore;
But if you're that high goddess once I thought,
 The more your godhead is, I lose the more.

RHYME a b a b

Dear fool, pity the fool who thought you clever!
 Dear wisdom, do not mock the fool that missed you!
Most fair, -- the blind has lost your face for ever!
 Most foul, -- how could I see you while I kissed you?

RHYME a a 

So . . . the poor love of fools and blind I've proved you,
For, foul or lovely, 'twas a fool that loved you.

TITLE A Memory

RHYME a b b a c d d c

Somewhile before the dawn I rose, and stept
 Softly along the dim way to your room,
 And found you sleeping in the quiet gloom,
And holiness about you as you slept.
I knelt there; till your waking fingers crept
 About my head, and held it.  I had rest
 Unhoped this side of Heaven, beneath your breast.
I knelt a long time, still; nor even wept.

RHYME a b c b c a

It was great wrong you did me; and for gain
Of that poor moment's kindliness, and ease,
And sleepy mother-comfort!  Child, you know
How easily love leaps out to dreams like these,
Who has seen them true.  And love that's wakened so
Takes all too long to lay asleep again.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Today I have been happy.  All the day
 I held the memory of you, and wove
Its laughter with the dancing light o' the spray,
 And sowed the sky with tiny clouds of love,
And sent you following the white waves of sea,
 And crowned your head with fancies, nothing worth,
Stray buds from that old dust of misery,
 Being glad with a new foolish quiet mirth.

RHYME a a b c b c

So lightly I played with those dark memories,
Just as a child, beneath the summer skies,
 Plays hour by hour with a strange shining stone,
For which (he knows not) towns were fire of old,
 And love has been betrayed, and murder done,
And great kings turned to a little bitter mould.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a

Warm perfumes like a breath from vine and tree
 Drift down the darkness.  Plangent, hidden from eyes
 Somewhere an `eukaleli' thrills and cries
And stabs with pain the night's brown savagery.
And dark scents whisper; and dim waves creep to me,
 Gleam like a woman's hair, stretch out, and rise;
 And new stars burn into the ancient skies,
Over the murmurous soft Hawaian sea.

RHYME a b a b c c

And I recall, lose, grasp, forget again,
 And still remember, a tale I have heard, or known,
An empty tale, of idleness and pain,
 Of two that loved -- or did not love -- and one
Whose perplexed heart did evil, foolishly,
A long while since, and by some other sea.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b c d c d

In the grey tumult of these after years
 Oft silence falls; the incessant wranglers part;
And less-than-echoes of remembered tears
 Hush all the loud confusion of the heart;
And a shade, through the toss'd ranks of mirth and crying
 Hungers, and pains, and each dull passionate mood, --
Quite lost, and all but all forgot, undying,
 Comes back the ecstasy of your quietude.

RHYME a a b c b c

So a poor ghost, beside his misty streams,
Is haunted by strange doubts, evasive dreams,
 Hints of a pre-Lethean life, of men,
Stars, rocks, and flesh, things unintelligible,
 And light on waving grass, he knows not when,
And feet that ran, but where, he cannot tell.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a c d d c

Not with vain tears, when we're beyond the sun,
 We'll beat on the substantial doors, nor tread
 Those dusty high-roads of the aimless dead
Plaintive for Earth; but rather turn and run
Down some close-covered by-way of the air,
 Some low sweet alley between wind and wind,
 Stoop under faint gleams, thread the shadows, find
Some whispering ghost-forgotten nook, and there

RHYME a b a b a b

Spend in pure converse our eternal day;
 Think each in each, immediately wise;
Learn all we lacked before; hear, know, and say
 What this tumultuous body now denies;
And feel, who have laid our groping hands away;
 And see, no longer blinded by our eyes.

TITLE 

RHYME a b b a a b b a

Down the blue night the unending columns press
 In noiseless tumult, break and wave and flow,
 Now tread the far South, or lift rounds of snow
Up to the white moon's hidden loveliness.
Some pause in their grave wandering comradeless,
 And turn with profound gesture vague and slow,
 As who would pray good for the world, but know
Their benediction empty as they bless.

RHYME a b c a c b

They say that the Dead die not, but remain
 Near to the rich heirs of their grief and mirth.
    I think they ride the calm mid-heaven, as these,
In wise majestic melancholy train,
    And watch the moon, and the still-raging seas,
 And men, coming and going on the earth.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a c d d c

They say there's a high windless world and strange,
 Out of the wash of days and temporal tide,
 Where Faith and Good, Wisdom and Truth abide,
`Aeterna corpora', subject to no change.
There the sure suns of these pale shadows move;
 There stand the immortal ensigns of our war;
 Our melting flesh fixed Beauty there, a star,
And perishing hearts, imperishable Love. . . .

RHYME a b c a c b

Dear, we know only that we sigh, kiss, smile;
 Each kiss lasts but the kissing; and grief goes over;
 Love has no habitation but the heart.
Poor straws! on the dark flood we catch awhile,
 Cling, and are borne into the night apart.
 The laugh dies with the lips, `Love' with the lover.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

Now that we've done our best and worst, and parted,
 I would fill my mind with thoughts that will not rend.
(O heart, I do not dare go empty-hearted)
 I'll think of Love in books, Love without end;
Women with child, content; and old men sleeping;
 And wet strong ploughlands, scarred for certain grain;
And babes that weep, and so forget their weeping;
 And the young heavens, forgetful after rain;
And evening hush, broken by homing wings;
 And Song's nobility, and Wisdom holy,
That live, we dead.  I would think of a thousand things,
 Lovely and durable, and taste them slowly,
One after one, like tasting a sweet food.
I have need to busy my heart with quietude.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

Love is a breach in the walls, a broken gate,
 Where that comes in that shall not go again;
Love sells the proud heart's citadel to Fate.
 They have known shame, who love unloved.  Even then,
When two mouths, thirsty each for each, find slaking,
 And agony's forgot, and hushed the crying
Of credulous hearts, in heaven -- such are but taking
 Their own poor dreams within their arms, and lying
Each in his lonely night, each with a ghost.
 Some share that night.  But they know love grows colder,
Grows false and dull, that was sweet lies at most.
 Astonishment is no more in hand or shoulder,
But darkens, and dies out from kiss to kiss.
All this is love; and all love is but this.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a c d c d 

Heart, you are restless as a paper scrap
 That's tossed down dusty pavements by the wind;
 Saying, "She is most wise, patient and kind.
Between the small hands folded in her lap
Surely a shamed head may bow down at length,
 And find forgiveness where the shadows stir
About her lips, and wisdom in her strength,
 Peace in her peace.  Come to her, come to her!" 

RHYME a b b c a c

She will not care.  She'll smile to see me come,
 So that I think all Heaven in flower to fold me.
 She'll give me all I ask, kiss me and hold me,
    And open wide upon that holy air
The gates of peace, and take my tiredness home,
    Kinder than God.  But, heart, she will not care.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b b

Your hands, my dear, adorable,
 Your lips of tenderness
-- Oh, I've loved you faithfully and well,
 Three years, or a bit less.
 It wasn't a success.

RHYME a b c b b

Thank God, that's done! and I'll take the road,
 Quit of my youth and you,
The Roman road to Wendover
 By Tring and Lilley Hoo,
 As a free man may do.

RHYME a b a b b

For youth goes over, the joys that fly,
 The tears that follow fast;
And the dirtiest things we do must lie
 Forgotten at the last;
 Even Love goes past.

RHYME a b a b b

What's left behind I shall not find,
 The splendour and the pain;
The splash of sun, the shouting wind,
 And the brave sting of rain,
 I may not meet again.

RHYME a b a b b

But the years, that take the best away,
 Give something in the end;
And a better friend than love have they,
 For none to mar or mend,
 That have themselves to friend.

RHYME a b a b b

I shall desire and I shall find
 The best of my desires;
The autumn road, the mellow wind
 That soothes the darkening shires.
 And laughter, and inn-fires.

RHYME a b a b b

White mist about the black hedgerows,
 The slumbering Midland plain,
The silence where the clover grows,
 And the dead leaves in the lane,
 Certainly, these remain.

RHYME a b c b b

And I shall find some girl perhaps,
 And a better one than you,
With eyes as wise, but kindlier,
 And lips as soft, but true.
 And I daresay she will do.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

I came back late and tired last night
 Into my little room,
To the long chair and the firelight
 And comfortable gloom.

RHYME a b a b c b

But as I entered softly in
 I saw a woman there,
The line of neck and cheek and chin,
 The darkness of her hair,
The form of one I did not know
 Sitting in my chair.

RHYME a b c b

I stood a moment fierce and still,
 Watching her neck and hair.
I made a step to her; and saw
 That there was no one there.

RHYME a b a b

It was some trick of the firelight
 That made me see her there.
It was a chance of shade and light
 And the cushion in the chair.

RHYME a b c b c b

Oh, all you happy over the earth,
 That night, how could I sleep?
I lay and watched the lonely gloom;
 And watched the moonlight creep
From wall to basin, round the room,
 All night I could not sleep.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b

Hands and lit faces eddy to a line;
 The dazed last minutes click; the clamour dies.
Beyond the great-swung arc o' the roof, divine,
 Night, smoky-scarv'd, with thousand coloured eyes

RHYME a b a b

Glares the imperious mystery of the way.
 Thirsty for dark, you feel the long-limbed train
Throb, stretch, thrill motion, slide, pull out and sway,
 Strain for the far, pause, draw to strength again. . . .

RHYME a b a b

As a man, caught by some great hour, will rise,
 Slow-limbed, to meet the light or find his love;
And, breathing long, with staring sightless eyes,
 Hands out, head back, agape and silent, move

RHYME a b a b

Sure as a flood, smooth as a vast wind blowing;
 And, gathering power and purpose as he goes,
Unstumbling, unreluctant, strong, unknowing,
 Borne by a will not his, that lifts, that grows,

RHYME a b a b

Sweep out to darkness, triumphing in his goal,
 Out of the fire, out of the little room. . . .
-- There is an end appointed, O my soul!
 Crimson and green the signals burn; the gloom

RHYME a b a b

Is hung with steam's far-blowing livid streamers.
 Lost into God, as lights in light, we fly,
Grown one with will, end-drunken huddled dreamers.
 The white lights roar.  The sounds of the world die.

RHYME a b a b

And lips and laughter are forgotten things.
 Speed sharpens; grows.  Into the night, and on,
The strength and splendour of our purpose swings.
 The lamps fade; and the stars.  We are alone.

TITLE Song

RHYME a b c b

All suddenly the wind comes soft,
 And Spring is here again;
And the hawthorn quickens with buds of green,
 And my heart with buds of pain.

RHYME a b c b

My heart all Winter lay so numb,
 The earth so dead and frore,
That I never thought the Spring would come,
 Or my heart wake any more.

RHYME a b c b

But Winter's broken and earth has woken,
 And the small birds cry again;
And the hawthorn hedge puts forth its buds,
 And my heart puts forth its pain.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b c d e d

When Beauty and Beauty meet
 All naked, fair to fair,
The earth is crying-sweet,
 And scattering-bright the air,
Eddying, dizzying, closing round,
 With soft and drunken laughter;
Veiling all that may befall
 After -- after --

RHYME a b a b c d e d

Where Beauty and Beauty met,
 Earth's still a-tremble there,
And winds are scented yet,
 And memory-soft the air,
Bosoming, folding glints of light,
 And shreds of shadowy laughter;
Not the tears that fill the years
 After -- after --

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b

The way that lovers use is this;
 They bow, catch hands, with never a word,
And their lips meet, and they do kiss,
 -- So I have heard.

RHYME a b a b

They queerly find some healing so,
 And strange attainment in the touch;
There is a secret lovers know,
 -- I have read as much.

RHYME a b a b

And theirs no longer joy nor smart,
 Changing or ending, night or day;
But mouth to mouth, and heart on heart,
 -- So lovers say.

TITLE 

RHYME a a *

Young Mary, loitering once her garden way,
Felt a warm splendour grow in the April day,
As wine that blushes water through.  And soon,
Out of the gold air of the afternoon,
One knelt before her:  hair he had, or fire,
Bound back above his ears with golden wire,
Baring the eager marble of his face.
Not man's nor woman's was the immortal grace
Rounding the limbs beneath that robe of white,
And lighting the proud eyes with changeless light,
Incurious.  Calm as his wings, and fair,
That presence filled the garden.  She stood there,
Saying, "What would you, Sir?"  He told his word,
"Blessed art thou of women!"  Half she heard,
Hands folded and face bowed, half long had known,
The message of that clear and holy tone,
That fluttered hot sweet sobs about her heart;
Such serene tidings moved such human smart.
Her breath came quick as little flakes of snow.
Her hands crept up her breast.  She did but know
It was not hers.  She felt a trembling stir
Within her body, a will too strong for her
That held and filled and mastered all.  With eyes
Closed, and a thousand soft short broken sighs,
She gave submission; fearful, meek, and glad. . . .
She wished to speak.  Under her breasts she had
Such multitudinous burnings, to and fro,
And throbs not understood; she did not know
If they were hurt or joy for her; but only
That she was grown strange to herself, half lonely,
All wonderful, filled full of pains to come
And thoughts she dare not think, swift thoughts and dumb,
Human, and quaint, her own, yet very far,
Divine, dear, terrible, familiar . . .
Her heart was faint for telling; to relate
Her limbs' sweet treachery, her strange high estate,
Over and over, whispering, half revealing,
Weeping; and so find kindness to her healing.
'Twixt tears and laughter, panic hurrying her,
She raised her eyes to that fair messenger.
He knelt unmoved, immortal; with his eyes
Gazing beyond her, calm to the calm skies;
Radiant, untroubled in his wisdom, kind.
His sheaf of lilies stirred not in the wind.
How should she, pitiful with mortality,
Try the wide peace of that felicity
With ripples of her perplexed shaken heart,
And hints of human ecstasy, human smart,
And whispers of the lonely weight she bore,
And how her womb within was hers no more
And at length hers? Being tired, she bowed her head;
And said, "So be it!"  The great wings were spread
Showering glory on the fields, and fire.
The whole air, singing, bore him up, and higher,

RHYME a a a

Unswerving, unreluctant.  Soon he shone
A gold speck in the gold skies; then was gone.
The air was colder, and grey.  She stood alone.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

The day that YOUTH had died,
There came to his grave-side,
In decent mourning, from the country's ends,
Those scatter'd friends

RHYME a b c a c b

Who had lived the boon companions of his prime,
And laughed with him and sung with him and wasted,
In feast and wine and many-crown'd carouse,
The days and nights and dawnings of the time
When YOUTH kept open house,
Nor left untasted

RHYME a b b a 

Aught of his high emprise and ventures dear,	
No quest of his unsharÕd	
All these, with loitering feet and sad head barÕd,	
Followed their old friendÕs bier.

RHYME a a *
	
Folly went first,	       
With muffled bells and coxcomb still reversÕd;	
And after trod the bearers, hat in handÑ	
Laughter, most hoarse, and Captain Pride with tanned	
And martial face all grim, and fussy Joy	
Who had to catch a train, and Lust, poor, snivelling boy;	       
These bore the dear departed.	
Behind them, broken-hearted,	

RHYME a a a

Came Grief, so noisy a widow, that all said,	
ÒHad he but wed	
Her elder sister Sorrow, in her stead!Ó	       

RHYME a a *

And by her, trying to soothe her all the time,	
The fatherless children, Colour, Tune, and Rhyme	
(The sweet lad Rhyme), ran all-uncomprehending.	
Then, at the wayÕs sad ending,	
Round the raw grave they stayÕd. Old Wisdom read,	       
In mumbling tone, the Service for the Dead.	

RHYME a b c a d b c d

There stood Romance,	
The furrowing tears had markÕd her rougd cheek;	
Poor old Conceit, his wonder unassuaged;	
Dead InnocencyÕs daughter, Ignorance;	       
And shabby, ill-dressÕd Generosity;	
And Argument, too full of woe to speak;	
Passion, grown portly, something middle-aged;	
And FriendshipÑnot a minute older, she;	

RHYME a a b c b d c d

Impatience, ever taking out his watch;	       
Faith, who was deaf, and had to lean, to catch	
Old WisdomÕs endless drone.	
Beauty was there,	
Pale in her black; dry-eyed; she stood alone.	
Poor mazÕd Imagination; Fancy wild;	       
Ardour, the sunlight on his greying hair;	
Contentment, who had known Youth as a child	

RHYME a b c a b c

And never seen him since. And Spring came too,	
Dancing over the tombs, and brought him flowersÑ	
She did not stay for long.	       
And Truth, and Grace, and all the merry crew,	
The laughing Winds and Rivers, and lithe Hours;	
And Hope, the dewy-eyed; and sorrowing Song;Ñ	

RHYME a a a b b

Yes, with much woe and mourning general,	
At dead YouthÕs funeral,	       
Even these were met once more together, all,	
Who erst the fair and living Youth did know;	
All, except only Love. Love had died long ago.

TITLE The Old Vicarage, Grantchester

RHYME a a *

JUST now the lilac is in bloom,	
All before my little room;	
And in my flower-beds, I think,	
Smile the carnation and the pink;	
And down the borders, well I know,	        
The poppy and the pansy blow
Oh! there the chestnuts, summer through,	
Beside the river make for you	
A tunnel of green gloom, and sleep	
Deeply above; and green and deep	       
The stream mysterious glides beneath,	
Green as a dream and deep as death.	
ÑOh, damn! I know it! and I know	
How the May fields all golden show,	
And when the day is young and sweet,	       
Gild gloriously the bare feet	
That run to bathe, Du lieber Gott!	
Here am I, sweating, sick, and hot,	
And there the shadowed waters fresh	       
Lean up to embrace the naked flesh.	
Temperamentvoll German Jews	
Drink beer around;Ñand there the dews	
Are soft beneath a morn of gold.	
Here tulips bloom as they are told;	       
Unkempt about those hedges blows	
An English unofficial rose;	
And there the unregulated sun	
Slopes down to rest when day is done,	
And wakes a vague unpunctual star,	       
A slippered Hesper; and there are	
Meads towards Haslingfield and Coton	
Where das BetretenÕs not verboten.	
  
RHYME a a *

... would I were	
In Grantchester, in Grantchester!Ñ	       
Some, it may be, can get in touch	
With Nature there, or Earth, or such.	
And clever modern men have seen	
A Faun a-peeping through the green,	
And felt the Classics were not dead,	       
To glimpse a NaiadÕs reedy head,	
Or hear the Goat-foot piping low:
But these are things I do not know.	
I only know that you may lie	
Day long and watch the Cambridge sky,	       
And, flower-lulled in sleepy grass,	
Hear the cool lapse of hours pass,	
Until the centuries blend and blur	
In Grantchester, in Grantchester.
Still in the dawnlit waters cool	       
His ghostly Lordship swims his pool,	
And tries the strokes, essays the tricks,	
Long learnt on Hellespont, or Styx.	
Dan Chaucer hears his river still	
Chatter beneath a phantom mill.	       
Tennyson notes, with studious eye,	
How Cambridge waters hurry by
And in that garden, black and white,	
Creep whispers through the grass all night;	
And spectral dance, before the dawn,	       
A hundred Vicars down the lawn;	
Curates, long dust, will come and go	
On lissom, clerical, printless toe;	
And oft between the boughs is seen	
The sly shade of a Rural Dean
Till, at a shiver in the skies,	
Vanishing with Satanic cries,	
The prim ecclesiastic rout	
Leaves but a startled sleeper-out,	
Grey heavens, the first birdÕs drowsy calls,	       
The falling house that never falls.	
  
RHYME a a *

God! I will pack, and take a train,	
And get me to England once again!	
For EnglandÕs the one land, I know,	
Where men with Splendid Hearts may go;	       
And Cambridgeshire, of all England,	
The shire for Men who Understand;	
And of that district I prefer	
The lovely hamlet Grantchester.	
For Cambridge people rarely smile,	       
Being urban, squat, and packed with guile;	
And Royston men in the far South	
Are black and fierce and strange of mouth;	
At Over they fling oaths at one,	
And worse than oaths at Trumpington,	       
And Ditton girls are mean and dirty,	
And thereÕs none in Harston under thirty,	
And folks in Shelford and those parts	
Have twisted lips and twisted hearts,	
And Barton men make Cockney rhymes,	       
And CotonÕs full of nameless crimes,	
And things are done youÕd not believe	
At Madingley on Christmas Eve.	
Strong men have run for miles and miles,	
When one from Cherry Hinton smiles;	       
Strong men have blanched, and shot their wives,	
Rather than send them to St. Ives;	
Strong men have cried like babes, bydam,	
To hear what happened at Babraham.	
But Grantchester! ah, Grantchester!	      
ThereÕs peace and holy quiet there,	
Great clouds along pacific skies,	
And men and women with straight eyes,	
Lithe children lovelier than a dream,	
A bosky wood, a slumbrous stream,	      
And little kindly winds that creep	
Round twilight corners, half asleep.	
In Grantchester their skins are white;	
They bathe by day, they bathe by night;	
The women there do all they ought;	      
The men observe the Rules of Thought.	
They love the Good; they worship Truth;	
They laugh uproariously in youth;	
(And when they get to feeling old,	
They up and shoot themselves, IÕm told)
  Ah God! to see the branches stir	
Across the moon at Grantchester!	
To smell the thrilling-sweet and rotten	
Unforgettable, unforgotten	
River-smell, and hear the breeze	      
Sobbing in the little trees.	
Say, do the elm-clumps greatly stand	
Still guardians of that holy land?	
The chestnuts shade, in reverend dream,	
The yet unacademic stream?	      
Is dawn a secret shy and cold	
Anadyomene, silver-gold?	
And sunset still a golden sea	
From Haslingfield to Madingley?	
And after, ere the night is born,	      
Do hares come out about the corn?	
Oh, is the water sweet and cool,	
Gentle and brown, above the pool?	
And laughs the immortal river still	
Under the mill, under the mill?	      
Say, is there Beauty yet to find?	
And Certainty? and Quiet kind?	
Deep meadows yet, for to forget	
The lies, and truths, and pain?É oh! yet	
Stands the Church clock at ten to three?	      
And is there honey still for tea?

TITLE Fafaia

RHYME a a *

Stars that seem so close and bright,
Watched by lovers through the night,
Swim in emptiness, men say,
Many a mile and year away.

And yonder star that burns so white,
May have died to dust and night
Ten, maybe, or fifteen year,
Before it shines upon my dear.

Oh! often among men below,
Heart cries out to heart, I know,
And one is dust a many years,
Child, before the other hears.

Heart from heart is all as far,
Fafaia, as start from star.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Bob Southey! You're a poet, poet laureate,		
       And representative of all the race.
     Although 'tis true that you turned out a Tory at
       Last, yours has lately been a common case.
     And now my epic renegade, what are ye at
       With all the lakers, in and out of place?
     A nest of tuneful persons, to my eye
     Like four and twenty blackbirds in a pye,

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Which pye being opened they began to sing'		
       (This old song and new simile holds good),	
     'A dainty dish to set before the King'		
       Or Regent, who admires such kind of food.	
     And Coleridge too has lately taken wing,		
       But like a hawk encumbered with his hood,	
     Explaining metaphysics to the nation.		
     I wish he would explain his explanation.		

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     You, Bob, are rather insolent, you know,
       At being disappointed in your wish
     To supersede all warblers here below,
       And be the only blackbird in the dish.
     And then you overstrain yourself, or so,
       And tumble downward like the flying fish
     Gasping on deck, because you soar too high,
     Bob, And fall for lack of moisture quite a dry 

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Wordsworth in a rather long Excursion
       (I think the quarto holds five hundred pages)
     Has given a sample from the vasty version
       Of his new system to perplex the sages.
     'Tis poetry, at least by his assertion,
       And may appear so when the Dog Star rages,
     And he who understands it would be able
     To add a story to the tower of Babel.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     You gentlemen, by dint of long seclusion
       From better company, have kept your own
     At Keswick, and through still continued fusion
       Of one another's minds at last have grown
     To deem, as a most logical conclusion,
       That poesy has wreaths for you alone.
     There is a narrowness in such a notion,
     Which makes me wish you'd change your lakes for ocean.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I would not imitate the petty thought,
       Nor coin my self-love to so base a vice,
     For all the glory your conversion brought,
       Since gold alone should not have been its price.
     You have your salary; was't for that you wrought?
       And Wordsworth has his place in the Excise.
     You're shabby fellows--true--but poets still
     And duly seated on the immortal hill.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Your bays may hide the baldness of your brows,
       Perhaps some virtuous blushes; let them go.
     To you I envy neither fruit nor boughs,
       And for the fame you would engross below,
     The field is universal and allows
       Scope to all such as feel the inherent glow.
     Scott, Rogers, Campbell, Moore, and Crabbe will try
     'Gainst you the question with posterity.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For me, who, wandering with pedestrian Muses,
       Contend not with you on the winged' steed,
     I wish your fate may yield ye, when she chooses,
       The fame you envy and the skill you need.
     And recollect a poet nothing loses
       In giving to his brethren their full meed
     Of merit, and complaint of present days
     Is not the certain path to future praise.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He that reserves his laurels for posterity
       (Who does not often claim the bright reversion)
     Has generally no great crop to spare it, he
       Being only injured by his own assertion.
     And although here and there some glorious rarity
       Arise like Titan from the sea's immersion,
     The major part of such appellants go
     To--God knows where--for no one else can know.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If fallen in evil days on evil tongues,
       Milton appealed to the avenger, Time,
     If Time, the avenger, execrates his wrongs
       And makes the word Miltonic mean sublime,
     He deigned not to belie his soul in songs,
       Nor turn his very talent to a crime.
     He did not loathe the sire to laud the son,
     But closed the tyrant-hater he begun.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Think'st thou, could he, the blind old man, arise
       Like Samuel from the grave to freeze once more
     The blood of monarchs with his prophecies,
        Or be alive again--again all hoar
     With time and trials, and those helpless eyes
       And heartless daughters--worn and pale and poor,
     Would he adore a sultan? He obey
     The intellectual eunuch Castlereagh?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Cold-blooded, smooth-faced, placid miscreant!
       Dabbling its sleek young hands in Erin's gore,
     And thus for wider carnage taught to pant,
       Transferred to gorge upon a sister shore,
     The vulgarest tool that tyranny could want,
       With just enough of talent and no more,
     To lengthen fetters by another fixed
     And offer poison long already mixed.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     An orator of such set trash of phrase,
       Ineffably, legitimately vile,
     That even its grossest flatterers dare not praise,
       Nor foes--all nations--condescend to smile.
     Not even a sprightly blunder's spark can blaze
       From that Ixion grindstone's ceaseless toil,
     That turns and turns to give the world a notion
     Of endless torments and perpetual motion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A bungler even in its disgusting trade,
       And botching, patching, leaving still behind
     Something of which its masters are afraid,
       States to be curbed and thoughts to be confined,
     Conspiracy or congress to be made,
       Cobbling at manacles for all mankind,
     A tinkering slave-maker, who mends old chains,
     With God and man's abhorrence for its gains.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If we may judge of matter by the mind,
     Emasculated to the marrow, it
     Hath but two objects, how to serve and bind,
     Deeming the chain it wears even men may fit,
     Eutropius of its many masters, blind
     To worth as freedom, wisdom as to wit,
     Fearless, because no feeling dwells in ice;
     Its very courage stagnates to a vice.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Where shall I turn me not to view its bonds,
       For I will never feel them. Italy,
     Thy late reviving Roman soul desponds
       Beneath the lie this state-thing breathed o'er thee.
     Thy clanking chain and Erin's yet green wounds
       Have voices, tongues to cry aloud for me.
     Europe has slaves, allies, kings, armies still,
     And Southey lives to sing them very ill.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Meantime, Sir Laureate, I proceed to dedicate
       In honest simple verse this song to you.
     And if in flattering strains I do not predicate,
       'Tis that I still retain my buff and blue;
     My politics as yet are all to educate.
       Apostasy's so fashionable too,
     To keep one creed's a task grown quite
     Herculean Is it not so, my Tory, ultra-Julian?

TITLE Don Juan, I

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I want a hero: an uncommon want,
       When every year and month sends forth a new one,
     Till, after cloying the gazettes with cant,
       The age discovers he is not the true one;
     Of such as these I should not care to vaunt,
       I 'll therefore take our ancient friend Don Juan--
     We all have seen him, in the pantomime,
     Sent to the devil somewhat ere his time.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Vernon, the butcher Cumberland, Wolfe, Hawke,
       Prince Ferdinand, Granby, Burgoyne, Keppel, Howe,
     Evil and good, have had their tithe of talk,
       And fill'd their sign posts then, like Wellesley now;
     Each in their turn like Banquo's monarchs stalk,
       Followers of fame, 'nine farrow' of that sow:
     France, too, had Buonaparte and Dumourier
     Recorded in the Moniteur and Courier.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Barnave, Brissot, Condorcet, Mirabeau,
       Petion, Clootz, Danton, Marat, La Fayette,
     Were French, and famous people, as we know:
       And there were others, scarce forgotten yet,
     Joubert, Hoche, Marceau, Lannes, Desaix, Moreau,
       With many of the military set,
     Exceedingly remarkable at times,
     But not at all adapted to my rhymes.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Nelson was once Britannia's god of war,
       And still should be so, but the tide is turn'd;
     There 's no more to be said of Trafalgar,
       'T is with our hero quietly inurn'd;
     Because the army 's grown more popular,
       At which the naval people are concern'd;
     Besides, the prince is all for the land-service,
     Forgetting Duncan, Nelson, Howe, and Jervis.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Brave men were living before Agamemnon
       And since, exceeding valorous and sage,
     A good deal like him too, though quite the same none;
       But then they shone not on the poet's page,
     And so have been forgotten:--I condemn none,
       But can't find any in the present age
     Fit for my poem (that is, for my new one);
     So, as I said, I 'll take my friend Don Juan.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Most epic poets plunge 'in medias res'
       (Horace makes this the heroic turnpike road),
     And then your hero tells, whene'er you please,
       What went before--by way of episode,
     While seated after dinner at his ease,
       Beside his mistress in some soft abode,
     Palace, or garden, paradise, or cavern,
     Which serves the happy couple for a tavern.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     That is the usual method, but not mine--
       My way is to begin with the beginning;
     The regularity of my design
       Forbids all wandering as the worst of sinning,
     And therefore I shall open with a line
       (Although it cost me half an hour in spinning)
     Narrating somewhat of Don Juan's father,
     And also of his mother, if you 'd rather.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In Seville was he born, a pleasant city,
       Famous for oranges and women--he
     Who has not seen it will be much to pity,
       So says the proverb--and I quite agree;
     Of all the Spanish towns is none more pretty,
       Cadiz perhaps--but that you soon may see;
     Don Juan's parents lived beside the river,
     A noble stream, and call'd the Guadalquivir.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     His father's name was Jose--Don, of course,--
       A true Hidalgo, free from every stain
     Of Moor or Hebrew blood, he traced his source
       Through the most Gothic gentlemen of Spain;
     A better cavalier ne'er mounted horse,
       Or, being mounted, e'er got down again,
     Than Jose, who begot our hero, who
     Begot--but that 's to come--Well, to renew:

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     His mother was a learned lady, famed
       For every branch of every science known
     In every Christian language ever named,
       With virtues equall'd by her wit alone,
     She made the cleverest people quite ashamed,
       And even the good with inward envy groan,
     Finding themselves so very much exceeded
     In their own way by all the things that she did.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her memory was a mine: she knew by heart
       All Calderon and greater part of Lope,
     So that if any actor miss'd his part
       She could have served him for the prompter's copy;
     For her Feinagle's were an useless art,
       And he himself obliged to shut up shop--he
     Could never make a memory so fine as
     That which adorn'd the brain of Donna Inez.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her favourite science was the mathematical,
       Her noblest virtue was her magnanimity,
     Her wit (she sometimes tried at wit) was Attic all,
       Her serious sayings darken'd to sublimity;
     In short, in all things she was fairly what I call
       A prodigy--her morning dress was dimity,
     Her evening silk, or, in the summer, muslin,
     And other stuffs, with which I won't stay puzzling.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She knew the Latin--that is, 'the Lord's prayer,'
       And Greek--the alphabet--I 'm nearly sure;
     She read some French romances here and there,
       Although her mode of speaking was not pure;
     For native Spanish she had no great care,
       At least her conversation was obscure;
     Her thoughts were theorems, her words a problem,
     As if she deem'd that mystery would ennoble 'em.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some women use their tongues--she look'd a lecture,
       Each eye a sermon, and her brow a homily,
     An all-in-all sufficient self-director,
       Like the lamented late Sir Samuel Romilly,
     The Law's expounder, and the State's corrector,
       Whose suicide was almost an anomaly--
     One sad example more, that 'All is vanity'
     (The jury brought their verdict in 'Insanity').

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In short, she was a walking calculation,
       Miss Edgeworth's novels stepping from their covers,
     Or Mrs. Trimmer's books on education,
       Or 'Coelebs' Wife' set out in quest of lovers,
     Morality's prim personification,
       In which not Envy's self a flaw discovers;
     To others' share let 'female errors fall,'
     For she had not even one--the worst of all.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O! she was perfect past all parallel--
       Of any modern female saint's comparison;
     So far above the cunning powers of hell,
       Her guardian angel had given up his garrison;
     Even her minutest motions went as well
       As those of the best time-piece made by Harrison:
     In virtues nothing earthly could surpass her,
     Save thine 'incomparable oil,' Macassar!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Perfect she was, but as perfection is
       Insipid in this naughty world of ours,
     Where our first parents never learn'd to kiss
       Till they were exiled from their earlier bowers,
     Where all was peace, and innocence, and bliss
       (I wonder how they got through the twelve hours),
     Don Jose, like a lineal son of Eve,
     Went plucking various fruit without her leave.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He was a mortal of the careless kind,
       With no great love for learning, or the learn'd,
     Who chose to go where'er he had a mind,
       And never dream'd his lady was concern'd;
     The world, as usual, wickedly inclined
       To see a kingdom or a house o'erturn'd,
     Whisper'd he had a mistress, some said two--
     But for domestic quarrels one will do.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now Donna Inez had, with all her merit,
       A great opinion of her own good qualities;
     Neglect, indeed, requires a saint to bear it,
       And such, indeed, she was in her moralities;
     But then she had a devil of a spirit,
       And sometimes mix'd up fancies with realities,
     And let few opportunities escape
     Of getting her liege lord into a scrape.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This was an easy matter with a man
       Oft in the wrong, and never on his guard;
     And even the wisest, do the best they can,
       Have moments, hours, and days, so unprepared,
     That you might 'brain them with their lady's fan;'
       And sometimes ladies hit exceeding hard,
     And fans turn into falchions in fair hands,
     And why and wherefore no one understands.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is pity learned virgins ever wed
       With persons of no sort of education,
     Or gentlemen, who, though well born and bred,
       Grow tired of scientific conversation:
     I don't choose to say much upon this head,
       I 'm a plain man, and in a single station,
     But--Oh! ye lords of ladies intellectual,
     Inform us truly, have they not hen-peck'd you all?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Don Jose and his lady quarrell'd--why,
       Not any of the many could divine,
     Though several thousand people chose to try,
       'T was surely no concern of theirs nor mine;
     I loathe that low vice--curiosity;
       But if there 's anything in which I shine,
     'T is in arranging all my friends' affairs,
     Not having of my own domestic cares.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And so I interfered, and with the best
       Intentions, but their treatment was not kind;
     I think the foolish people were possess'd,
       For neither of them could I ever find,
     Although their porter afterwards confess'd--
       But that 's no matter, and the worst 's behind,
     For little Juan o'er me threw, down stairs,
     A pail of housemaid's water unawares.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A little curly-headed, good-for-nothing,
       And mischief-making monkey from his birth;
     His parents ne'er agreed except in doting
       Upon the most unquiet imp on earth;
     Instead of quarrelling, had they been but both in
       Their senses, they 'd have sent young master forth
     To school, or had him soundly whipp'd at home,
     To teach him manners for the time to come.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Don Jose and the Donna Inez led
       For some time an unhappy sort of life,
     Wishing each other, not divorced, but dead;
       They lived respectably as man and wife,
     Their conduct was exceedingly well-bred,
       And gave no outward signs of inward strife,
     Until at length the smother'd fire broke out,
     And put the business past all kind of doubt.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For Inez call'd some druggists and physicians,
       And tried to prove her loving lord was mad;
     But as he had some lucid intermissions,
       She next decided he was only bad;
     Yet when they ask'd her for her depositions,
       No sort of explanation could be had,
     Save that her duty both to man and God
     Required this conduct--which seem'd very odd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She kept a journal, where his faults were noted,
       And open'd certain trunks of books and letters,
     All which might, if occasion served, be quoted;
       And then she had all Seville for abettors,
     Besides her good old grandmother (who doted);
       The hearers of her case became repeaters,
     Then advocates, inquisitors, and judges,
     Some for amusement, others for old grudges.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And then this best and weakest woman bore
       With such serenity her husband's woes,
     Just as the Spartan ladies did of yore,
       Who saw their spouses kill'd, and nobly chose
     Never to say a word about them more--
       Calmly she heard each calumny that rose,
     And saw his agonies with such sublimity,
     That all the world exclaim'd, 'What magnanimity!'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     No doubt this patience, when the world is damning us,
       Is philosophic in our former friends;
     'T is also pleasant to be deem'd magnanimous,
       The more so in obtaining our own ends;
     And what the lawyers call a 'malus animus'
       Conduct like this by no means comprehends;
     Revenge in person 's certainly no virtue,
     But then 't is not my fault, if others hurt you.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And if your quarrels should rip up old stories,
       And help them with a lie or two additional,
     I 'm not to blame, as you well know--no more is
       Any one else--they were become traditional;
     Besides, their resurrection aids our glories
       By contrast, which is what we just were wishing all:
     And science profits by this resurrection--
     Dead scandals form good subjects for dissection.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Their friends had tried at reconciliation,
       Then their relations, who made matters worse.
     ('T were hard to tell upon a like occasion
       To whom it may be best to have recourse--
     I can't say much for friend or yet relation):
       The lawyers did their utmost for divorce,
     But scarce a fee was paid on either side
     Before, unluckily, Don Jose died.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He died: and most unluckily, because,
       According to all hints I could collect
     From counsel learned in those kinds of laws
       (Although their talk 's obscure and circumspect),
     His death contrived to spoil a charming cause;
       A thousand pities also with respect
     To public feeling, which on this occasion
     Was manifested in a great sensation.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But, ah! he died; and buried with him lay
       The public feeling and the lawyers' fees:
     His house was sold, his servants sent away,
       A Jew took one of his two mistresses,
     A priest the other--at least so they say:
       I ask'd the doctors after his disease--
     He died of the slow fever call'd the tertian,
     And left his widow to her own aversion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet Jose was an honourable man,
       That I must say who knew him very well;
     Therefore his frailties I 'll no further scan
       Indeed there were not many more to tell;
     And if his passions now and then outran
       Discretion, and were not so peaceable
     As Numa's (who was also named Pompilius),
     He had been ill brought up, and was born bilious.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Whate'er might be his worthlessness or worth,
       Poor fellow! he had many things to wound him.
     Let 's own--since it can do no good on earth--
       It was a trying moment that which found him
     Standing alone beside his desolate hearth,
       Where all his household gods lay shiver'd round him:
     No choice was left his feelings or his pride,
     Save death or Doctors' Commons--so he died.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Dying intestate, Juan was sole heir
       To a chancery suit, and messuages, and lands,
     Which, with a long minority and care,
       Promised to turn out well in proper hands:
     Inez became sole guardian, which was fair,
       And answer'd but to nature's just demands;
     An only son left with an only mother
     Is brought up much more wisely than another.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Sagest of women, even of widows, she
       Resolved that Juan should be quite a paragon,
     And worthy of the noblest pedigree
       (His sire was of Castile, his dam from Aragon):
     Then for accomplishments of chivalry,
       In case our lord the king should go to war again,
     He learn'd the arts of riding, fencing, gunnery,
     And how to scale a fortress--or a nunnery.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But that which Donna Inez most desired,
       And saw into herself each day before all
     The learned tutors whom for him she hired,
       Was, that his breeding should be strictly moral;
     Much into all his studies she inquired,
       And so they were submitted first to her, all,
     Arts, sciences, no branch was made a mystery
     To Juan's eyes, excepting natural history.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The languages, especially the dead,
       The sciences, and most of all the abstruse,
     The arts, at least all such as could be said
       To be the most remote from common use,
     In all these he was much and deeply read;
       But not a page of any thing that 's loose,
     Or hints continuation of the species,
     Was ever suffer'd, lest he should grow vicious.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     His classic studies made a little puzzle,
       Because of filthy loves of gods and goddesses,
     Who in the earlier ages raised a bustle,
       But never put on pantaloons or bodices;
     His reverend tutors had at times a tussle,
       And for their AEneids, Iliads, and Odysseys,
     Were forced to make an odd sort! of apology,
     For Donna Inez dreaded the Mythology.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Ovid 's a rake, as half his verses show him,
       Anacreon's morals are a still worse sample,
     Catullus scarcely has a decent poem,
       I don't think Sappho's Ode a good example,
     Although Longinus tells us there is no hymn
       Where the sublime soars forth on wings more ample:
     But Virgil's songs are pure, except that horrid one
     Beginning with 'Formosum Pastor Corydon.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Lucretius' irreligion is too strong,
       For early stomachs, to prove wholesome food;
     I can't help thinking Juvenal was wrong,
       Although no doubt his real intent was good,
     For speaking out so plainly in his song,
       So much indeed as to be downright rude;
     And then what proper person can be partial
     To all those nauseous epigrams of Martial?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan was taught from out the best edition,
       Expurgated by learned men, who place
     Judiciously, from out the schoolboy's vision,
       The grosser parts; but, fearful to deface
     Too much their modest bard by this omission,
       And pitying sore his mutilated case,
     They only add them all in an appendix,
     Which saves, in fact, the trouble of an index;

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For there we have them all 'at one fell swoop,'
       Instead of being scatter'd through the Pages;
     They stand forth marshall'd in a handsome troop,
       To meet the ingenuous youth of future ages,
     Till some less rigid editor shall stoop
       To call them back into their separate cages,
     Instead of standing staring all together,
     Like garden gods--and not so decent either.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The Missal too (it was the family Missal)
       Was ornamented in a sort of way
     Which ancient mass-books often are, and this all
       Kinds of grotesques illumined; and how they,
     Who saw those figures on the margin kiss all,
       Could turn their optics to the text and pray,
     Is more than I know--But Don Juan's mother
     Kept this herself, and gave her son another.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Sermons he read, and lectures he endured,
       And homilies, and lives of all the saints;
     To Jerome and to Chrysostom inured,
       He did not take such studies for restraints;
     But how faith is acquired, and then ensured,
       So well not one of the aforesaid paints
     As Saint Augustine in his fine Confessions,
     Which make the reader envy his transgressions.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This, too, was a seal'd book to little Juan--
       I can't but say that his mamma was right,
     If such an education was the true one.
       She scarcely trusted him from out her sight;
     Her maids were old, and if she took a new one,
       You might be sure she was a perfect fright;
     She did this during even her husband's life--
     I recommend as much to every wife.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Young Juan wax'd in goodliness and grace;
       At six a charming child, and at eleven
     With all the promise of as fine a face
       As e'er to man's maturer growth was given:
     He studied steadily, and grew apace,
       And seem'd, at least, in the right road to heaven,
     For half his days were pass'd at church, the other
     Between his tutors, confessor, and mother.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     At six, I said, he was a charming child,
       At twelve he was a fine, but quiet boy;
     Although in infancy a little wild,
       They tamed him down amongst them: to destroy
     His natural spirit not in vain they toil'd,
       At least it seem'd so; and his mother's joy
     Was to declare how sage, and still, and steady,
     Her young philosopher was grown already.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I had my doubts, perhaps I have them still,
       But what I say is neither here nor there:
     I knew his father well, and have some skill
       In character--but it would not be fair
     From sire to son to augur good or ill:
       He and his wife were an ill-sorted pair--
     But scandal 's my aversion--I protest
     Against all evil speaking, even in jest.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For my part I say nothing--nothing--but
       This I will say--my reasons are my own--
     That if I had an only son to put
       To school (as God be praised that I have none),
     'T is not with Donna Inez I would shut
       Him up to learn his catechism alone,
     No--no--I 'd send him out betimes to college,
     For there it was I pick'd up my own knowledge.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For there one learns--'t is not for me to boast,
       Though I acquired--but I pass over that,
     As well as all the Greek I since have lost:
       I say that there 's the place--but 'Verbum sat.'
     I think I pick'd up too, as well as most,
       Knowledge of matters--but no matter what--
     I never married--but, I think, I know
     That sons should not be educated so.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Young Juan now was sixteen years of age,
       Tall, handsome, slender, but well knit: he seem'd
     Active, though not so sprightly, as a page;
       And everybody but his mother deem'd
     Him almost man; but she flew in a rage
       And bit her lips (for else she might have scream'd)
     If any said so, for to be precocious
     Was in her eyes a thing the most atrocious.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Amongst her numerous acquaintance, all
       Selected for discretion and devotion,
     There was the Donna Julia, whom to call
       Pretty were but to give a feeble notion
     Of many charms in her as natural
       As sweetness to the flower, or salt to ocean,
     Her zone to Venus, or his bow to Cupid
     (But this last simile is trite and stupid).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The darkness of her Oriental eye
       Accorded with her Moorish origin
     (Her blood was not all Spanish, by the by;
       In Spain, you know, this is a sort of sin);
     When proud Granada fell, and, forced to fly,
       Boabdil wept, of Donna Julia's kin
     Some went to Africa, some stay'd in Spain,
     Her great-great-grandmamma chose to remain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She married (I forget the pedigree)
       With an Hidalgo, who transmitted down
     His blood less noble than such blood should be;
       At such alliances his sires would frown,
     In that point so precise in each degree
       That they bred in and in, as might be shown,
     Marrying their cousins--nay, their aunts, and nieces,
     Which always spoils the breed, if it increases.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This heathenish cross restored the breed again,
       Ruin'd its blood, but much improved its flesh;
     For from a root the ugliest in Old Spain
       Sprung up a branch as beautiful as fresh;
     The sons no more were short, the daughters plain:
       But there 's a rumour which I fain would hush,
     'T is said that Donna Julia's grandmamma
     Produced her Don more heirs at love than law.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     However this might be, the race went on
       Improving still through every generation,
     Until it centred in an only son,
       Who left an only daughter; my narration
     May have suggested that this single one
       Could be but Julia (whom on this occasion
     I shall have much to speak about), and she
     Was married, charming, chaste, and twenty-three.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her eye (I 'm very fond of handsome eyes)
       Was large and dark, suppressing half its fire
     Until she spoke, then through its soft disguise
       Flash'd an expression more of pride than ire,
     And love than either; and there would arise
       A something in them which was not desire,
     But would have been, perhaps, but for the soul
     Which struggled through and chasten'd down the whole.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her glossy hair was cluster'd o'er a brow
       Bright with intelligence, and fair, and smooth;
     Her eyebrow's shape was like th' aerial bow,
       Her cheek all purple with the beam of youth,
     Mounting at times to a transparent glow,
       As if her veins ran lightning; she, in sooth,
     Possess'd an air and grace by no means common:
     Her stature tall--I hate a dumpy woman.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Wedded she was some years, and to a man
       Of fifty, and such husbands are in plenty;
     And yet, I think, instead of such a ONE
       'T were better to have TWO of five-and-twenty,
     Especially in countries near the sun:
       And now I think on 't, 'mi vien in mente,'
     Ladies even of the most uneasy virtue
     Prefer a spouse whose age is short of thirty.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is a sad thing, I cannot choose but say,
       And all the fault of that indecent sun,
     Who cannot leave alone our helpless clay,
       But will keep baking, broiling, burning on,
     That howsoever people fast and pray,
       The flesh is frail, and so the soul undone:
     What men call gallantry, and gods adultery,
     Is much more common where the climate 's sultry.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Happy the nations of the moral North!
       Where all is virtue, and the winter season
     Sends sin, without a rag on, shivering forth
       ('T was snow that brought St. Anthony to reason);
     Where juries cast up what a wife is worth,
       By laying whate'er sum in mulct they please on
     The lover, who must pay a handsome price,
     Because it is a marketable vice.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alfonso was the name of Julia's lord,
       A man well looking for his years, and who
     Was neither much beloved nor yet abhorr'd:
       They lived together, as most people do,
     Suffering each other's foibles by accord,
       And not exactly either one or two;
     Yet he was jealous, though he did not show it,
     For jealousy dislikes the world to know it.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Julia was--yet I never could see why--
       With Donna Inez quite a favourite friend;
     Between their tastes there was small sympathy,
       For not a line had Julia ever penn'd:
     Some people whisper but no doubt they lie,
       For malice still imputes some private end,
     That Inez had, ere Don Alfonso's marriage,
     Forgot with him her very prudent carriage;

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And that still keeping up the old connection,
       Which time had lately render'd much more chaste,
     She took his lady also in affection,
       And certainly this course was much the best:
     She flatter'd Julia with her sage protection,
       And complimented Don Alfonso's taste;
     And if she could not (who can?) silence scandal,
     At least she left it a more slender handle.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I can't tell whether Julia saw the affair
       With other people's eyes, or if her own
     Discoveries made, but none could be aware
       Of this, at least no symptom e'er was shown;
     Perhaps she did not know, or did not care,
       Indifferent from the first or callous grown:
     I 'm really puzzled what to think or say,
     She kept her counsel in so close a way.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan she saw, and, as a pretty child,
       Caress'd him often--such a thing might be
     Quite innocently done, and harmless styled,
       When she had twenty years, and thirteen he;
     But I am not so sure I should have smiled
       When he was sixteen, Julia twenty-three;
     These few short years make wondrous alterations,
     Particularly amongst sun-burnt nations.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Whate'er the cause might be, they had become
       Changed; for the dame grew distant, the youth shy,
     Their looks cast down, their greetings almost dumb,
       And much embarrassment in either eye;
     There surely will be little doubt with some
       That Donna Julia knew the reason why,
     But as for Juan, he had no more notion
     Than he who never saw the sea of ocean.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet Julia's very coldness still was kind,
       And tremulously gentle her small hand
     Withdrew itself from his, but left behind
       A little pressure, thrilling, and so bland
     And slight, so very slight, that to the mind
       'T was but a doubt; but ne'er magician's wand
     Wrought change with all Armida's fairy art
     Like what this light touch left on Juan's heart.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And if she met him, though she smiled no more,
       She look'd a sadness sweeter than her smile,
     As if her heart had deeper thoughts in store
       She must not own, but cherish'd more the while
     For that compression in its burning core;
       Even innocence itself has many a wile,
     And will not dare to trust itself with truth,
     And love is taught hypocrisy from youth.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But passion most dissembles, yet betrays
       Even by its darkness; as the blackest sky
     Foretells the heaviest tempest, it displays
       Its workings through the vainly guarded eye,
     And in whatever aspect it arrays
       Itself, 't is still the same hypocrisy;
     Coldness or anger, even disdain or hate,
     Are masks it often wears, and still too late.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then there were sighs, the deeper for suppression,
       And stolen glances, sweeter for the theft,
     And burning blushes, though for no transgression,
       Tremblings when met, and restlessness when left;
     All these are little preludes to possession,
       Of which young passion cannot be bereft,
     And merely tend to show how greatly love is
     Embarrass'd at first starting with a novice.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Poor Julia's heart was in an awkward state;
       She felt it going, and resolved to make
     The noblest efforts for herself and mate,
       For honour's, pride's, religion's, virtue's sake;
     Her resolutions were most truly great,
       And almost might have made a Tarquin quake:
     She pray'd the Virgin Mary for her grace,
     As being the best judge of a lady's case.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She vow'd she never would see Juan more,
       And next day paid a visit to his mother,
     And look'd extremely at the opening door,
       Which, by the Virgin's grace, let in another;
     Grateful she was, and yet a little sore--
       Again it opens, it can be no other,
     'T is surely Juan now--No! I 'm afraid
     That night the Virgin was no further pray'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She now determined that a virtuous woman
       Should rather face and overcome temptation,
     That flight was base and dastardly, and no man
       Should ever give her heart the least sensation;
     That is to say, a thought beyond the common
       Preference, that we must feel upon occasion
     For people who are pleasanter than others,
     But then they only seem so many brothers.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And even if by chance--and who can tell?
       The devil 's so very sly--she should discover
     That all within was not so very well,
       And, if still free, that such or such a lover
     Might please perhaps, a virtuous wife can quell
       Such thoughts, and be the better when they 're over;
     And if the man should ask, 't is but denial:
     I recommend young ladies to make trial.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And then there are such things as love divine,
       Bright and immaculate, unmix'd and pure,
     Such as the angels think so very fine,
       And matrons who would be no less secure,
     Platonic, perfect, 'just such love as mine;'
       Thus Julia said--and thought so, to be sure;
     And so I 'd have her think, were I the man
     On whom her reveries celestial ran.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Such love is innocent, and may exist
       Between young persons without any danger.
     A hand may first, and then a lip be kist;
       For my part, to such doings I 'm a stranger,
     But hear these freedoms form the utmost list
       Of all o'er which such love may be a ranger:
     If people go beyond, 't is quite a crime,
     But not my fault--I tell them all in time.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Love, then, but love within its proper limits,
       Was Julia's innocent determination
     In young Don Juan's favour, and to him its
       Exertion might be useful on occasion;
     And, lighted at too pure a shrine to dim its
       Ethereal lustre, with what sweet persuasion
     He might be taught, by love and her together--
     I really don't know what, nor Julia either.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Fraught with this fine intention, and well fenced
       In mail of proof--her purity of soul--
     She, for the future of her strength convinced.
       And that her honour was a rock, or mole,
     Exceeding sagely from that hour dispensed
       With any kind of troublesome control;
     But whether Julia to the task was equal
     Is that which must be mention'd in the sequel.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her plan she deem'd both innocent and feasible,
       And, surely, with a stripling of sixteen
     Not scandal's fangs could fix on much that 's seizable,
       Or if they did so, satisfied to mean
     Nothing but what was good, her breast was peaceable--
       A quiet conscience makes one so serene!
     Christians have burnt each other, quite persuaded
     That all the Apostles would have done as they did.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And if in the mean time her husband died,
       But Heaven forbid that such a thought should cross
     Her brain, though in a dream! (and then she sigh'd)
       Never could she survive that common loss;
     But just suppose that moment should betide,
       I only say suppose it--inter nos.
     (This should be entre nous, for Julia thought
     In French, but then the rhyme would go for naught.)

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I only say suppose this supposition:
       Juan being then grown up to man's estate
     Would fully suit a widow of condition,
       Even seven years hence it would not be too late;
     And in the interim (to pursue this vision)
       The mischief, after all, could not be great,
     For he would learn the rudiments of love,
     I mean the seraph way of those above.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     So much for Julia. Now we 'll turn to Juan.
       Poor little fellow! he had no idea
     Of his own case, and never hit the true one;
       In feelings quick as Ovid's Miss Medea,
     He puzzled over what he found a new one,
       But not as yet imagined it could be
     Thing quite in course, and not at all alarming,
     Which, with a little patience, might grow charming.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Silent and pensive, idle, restless, slow,
       His home deserted for the lonely wood,
     Tormented with a wound he could not know,
       His, like all deep grief, plunged in solitude:
     I 'm fond myself of solitude or so,
       But then, I beg it may be understood,
     By solitude I mean a sultan's, not
     A hermit's, with a haram for a grot.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Oh Love! in such a wilderness as this,
       Where transport and security entwine,
     Here is the empire of thy perfect bliss,
       And here thou art a god indeed divine.'
     The bard I quote from does not sing amiss,
       With the exception of the second line,
     For that same twining 'transport and security'
     Are twisted to a phrase of some obscurity.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The poet meant, no doubt, and thus appeals
       To the good sense and senses of mankind,
     The very thing which every body feels,
       As all have found on trial, or may find,
     That no one likes to be disturb'd at meals
       Or love.--I won't say more about 'entwined'
     Or 'transport,' as we knew all that before,
     But beg 'Security' will bolt the door.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Young Juan wander'd by the glassy brooks,
       Thinking unutterable things; he threw
     Himself at length within the leafy nooks
       Where the wild branch of the cork forest grew;
     There poets find materials for their books,
       And every now and then we read them through,
     So that their plan and prosody are eligible,
     Unless, like Wordsworth, they prove unintelligible.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He, Juan (and not Wordsworth), so pursued
       His self-communion with his own high soul,
     Until his mighty heart, in its great mood,
       Had mitigated part, though not the whole
     Of its disease; he did the best he could
       With things not very subject to control,
     And turn'd, without perceiving his condition,
     Like Coleridge, into a metaphysician.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He thought about himself, and the whole earth
       Of man the wonderful, and of the stars,
     And how the deuce they ever could have birth;
       And then he thought of earthquakes, and of wars,
     How many miles the moon might have in girth,
       Of air-balloons, and of the many bars
     To perfect knowledge of the boundless skies;--
     And then he thought of Donna Julia's eyes.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In thoughts like these true wisdom may discern
       Longings sublime, and aspirations high,
     Which some are born with, but the most part learn
       To plague themselves withal, they know not why:
     'T was strange that one so young should thus concern
       His brain about the action of the sky;
     If you think 't was philosophy that this did,
     I can't help thinking puberty assisted.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He pored upon the leaves, and on the flowers,
       And heard a voice in all the winds; and then
     He thought of wood-nymphs and immortal bowers,
       And how the goddesses came down to men:
     He miss'd the pathway, he forgot the hours,
       And when he look'd upon his watch again,
     He found how much old Time had been a winner--
     He also found that he had lost his dinner.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Sometimes he turn'd to gaze upon his book,
       Boscan, or Garcilasso;--by the wind
     Even as the page is rustled while we look,
       So by the poesy of his own mind
     Over the mystic leaf his soul was shook,
       As if 't were one whereon magicians bind
     Their spells, and give them to the passing gale,
     According to some good old woman's tale.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thus would he while his lonely hours away
       Dissatisfied, nor knowing what he wanted;
     Nor glowing reverie, nor poet's lay,
       Could yield his spirit that for which it panted,
     A bosom whereon he his head might lay,
       And hear the heart beat with the love it granted,
     With--several other things, which I forget,
     Or which, at least, I need not mention yet.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Those lonely walks, and lengthening reveries,
       Could not escape the gentle Julia's eyes;
     She saw that Juan was not at his ease;
       But that which chiefly may, and must surprise,
     Is, that the Donna Inez did not tease
       Her only son with question or surmise:
     Whether it was she did not see, or would not,
     Or, like all very clever people, could not.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This may seem strange, but yet 't is very common;
       For instance--gentlemen, whose ladies take
     Leave to o'erstep the written rights of woman,
       And break the--Which commandment is 't they break?
     (I have forgot the number, and think no man
       Should rashly quote, for fear of a mistake.)
     I say, when these same gentlemen are jealous,
     They make some blunder, which their ladies tell us.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A real husband always is suspicious,
       But still no less suspects in the wrong place,
     Jealous of some one who had no such wishes,
       Or pandering blindly to his own disgrace,
     By harbouring some dear friend extremely vicious;
       The last indeed 's infallibly the case:
     And when the spouse and friend are gone off wholly,
     He wonders at their vice, and not his folly.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thus parents also are at times short-sighted;
       Though watchful as the lynx, they ne'er discover,
     The while the wicked world beholds delighted,
       Young Hopeful's mistress, or Miss Fanny's lover,
     Till some confounded escapade has blighted
       The plan of twenty years, and all is over;
     And then the mother cries, the father swears,
     And wonders why the devil he got heirs.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But Inez was so anxious, and so clear
       Of sight, that I must think, on this occasion,
     She had some other motive much more near
       For leaving Juan to this new temptation;
     But what that motive was, I sha'n't say here;
       Perhaps to finish Juan's education,
     Perhaps to open Don Alfonso's eyes,
     In case he thought his wife too great a prize.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It was upon a day, a summer's day;-
       Summer's indeed a very dangerous season,
     And so is spring about the end of May;
       The sun, no doubt, is the prevailing reason;
     But whatsoe'er the cause is, one may say,
       And stand convicted of more truth than treason,
     That there are months which nature grows more merry in,--
     March has its hares, and May must have its heroine.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was on a summer's day--the sixth of June:--
       I like to be particular in dates,
     Not only of the age, and year, but moon;
       They are a sort of post-house, where the Fates
     Change horses, making history change its tune,
       Then spur away o'er empires and o'er states,
     Leaving at last not much besides chronology,
     Excepting the post-obits of theology.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was on the sixth of June, about the hour
       Of half-past six--perhaps still nearer seven--
     When Julia sate within as pretty a bower
       As e'er held houri in that heathenish heaven
     Described by Mahomet, and Anacreon Moore,
       To whom the lyre and laurels have been given,
     With all the trophies of triumphant song--
     He won them well, and may he wear them long!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She sate, but not alone; I know not well
       How this same interview had taken place,
     And even if I knew, I should not tell--
       People should hold their tongues in any case;
     No matter how or why the thing befell,
       But there were she and Juan, face to face--
     When two such faces are so, 't would be wise,
     But very difficult, to shut their eyes.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     How beautiful she look'd! her conscious heart
       Glow'd in her cheek, and yet she felt no wrong.
     O Love! how perfect is thy mystic art,
       Strengthening the weak, and trampling on the strong,
     How self-deceitful is the sagest part
       Of mortals whom thy lure hath led along--
     The precipice she stood on was immense,
     So was her creed in her own innocence.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She thought of her own strength, and Juan's youth,
       And of the folly of all prudish fears,
     Victorious virtue, and domestic truth,
       And then of Don Alfonso's fifty years:
     I wish these last had not occurr'd, in sooth,
       Because that number rarely much endears,
     And through all climes, the snowy and the sunny,
     Sounds ill in love, whate'er it may in money.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     When people say, 'I've told you fifty times,'
       They mean to scold, and very often do;
     When poets say, 'I've written fifty rhymes,'
       They make you dread that they 'll recite them too;
     In gangs of fifty, thieves commit their crimes;
       At fifty love for love is rare, 't is true,
     But then, no doubt, it equally as true is,
     A good deal may be bought for fifty Louis.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Julia had honour, virtue, truth, and love,
       For Don Alfonso; and she inly swore,
     By all the vows below to powers above,
       She never would disgrace the ring she wore,
     Nor leave a wish which wisdom might reprove;
       And while she ponder'd this, besides much more,
     One hand on Juan's carelessly was thrown,
     Quite by mistake--she thought it was her own;

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Unconsciously she lean'd upon the other,
       Which play'd within the tangles of her hair:
     And to contend with thoughts she could not smother
       She seem'd by the distraction of her air.
     'T was surely very wrong in Juan's mother
       To leave together this imprudent pair,
     She who for many years had watch'd her son so--
     I 'm very certain mine would not have done so.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The hand which still held Juan's, by degrees
       Gently, but palpably confirm'd its grasp,
     As if it said, 'Detain me, if you please;'
       Yet there 's no doubt she only meant to clasp
     His fingers with a pure Platonic squeeze:
       She would have shrunk as from a toad, or asp,
     Had she imagined such a thing could rouse
     A feeling dangerous to a prudent spouse.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I cannot know what Juan thought of this,
       But what he did, is much what you would do;
     His young lip thank'd it with a grateful kiss,
       And then, abash'd at its own joy, withdrew
     In deep despair, lest he had done amiss,--
       Love is so very timid when 't is new:
     She blush'd, and frown'd not, but she strove to speak,
     And held her tongue, her voice was grown so weak.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The sun set, and up rose the yellow moon:
       The devil 's in the moon for mischief; they
     Who call'd her CHASTE, methinks, began too soon
       Their nomenclature; there is not a day,
     The longest, not the twenty-first of June,
       Sees half the business in a wicked way
     On which three single hours of moonshine smile--
     And then she looks so modest all the while.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There is a dangerous silence in that hour,
       A stillness, which leaves room for the full soul
     To open all itself, without the power
       Of calling wholly back its self-control;
     The silver light which, hallowing tree and tower,
       Sheds beauty and deep softness o'er the whole,
     Breathes also to the heart, and o'er it throws
     A loving languor, which is not repose.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Julia sate with Juan, half embraced
       And half retiring from the glowing arm,
     Which trembled like the bosom where 't was placed;
       Yet still she must have thought there was no harm,
     Or else 't were easy to withdraw her waist;
       But then the situation had its charm,
     And then--God knows what next--I can't go on;
     I 'm almost sorry that I e'er begun.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O Plato! Plato! you have paved the way,
       With your confounded fantasies, to more
     Immoral conduct by the fancied sway
       Your system feigns o'er the controulless core
     Of human hearts, than all the long array
       Of poets and romancers:--You 're a bore,
     A charlatan, a coxcomb--and have been,
     At best, no better than a go-between.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Julia's voice was lost, except in sighs,
       Until too late for useful conversation;
     The tears were gushing from her gentle eyes,
       I wish indeed they had not had occasion,
     But who, alas! can love, and then be wise?
       Not that remorse did not oppose temptation;
     A little still she strove, and much repented
     And whispering 'I will ne'er consent'--consented.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is said that Xerxes offer'd a reward
       To those who could invent him a new pleasure:
     Methinks the requisition 's rather hard,
       And must have cost his majesty a treasure:
     For my part, I 'm a moderate-minded bard,
       Fond of a little love (which I call leisure);
     I care not for new pleasures, as the old
     Are quite enough for me, so they but hold.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O Pleasure! you are indeed a pleasant thing,
       Although one must be damn'd for you, no doubt:
     I make a resolution every spring
       Of reformation, ere the year run out,
     But somehow, this my vestal vow takes wing,
       Yet still, I trust it may be kept throughout:
     I 'm very sorry, very much ashamed,
     And mean, next winter, to be quite reclaim'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Here my chaste Muse a liberty must take--
       Start not! still chaster reader--she 'll be nice hence--
     Forward, and there is no great cause to quake;
       This liberty is a poetic licence,
     Which some irregularity may make
       In the design, and as I have a high sense
     Of Aristotle and the Rules, 't is fit
     To beg his pardon when I err a bit.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This licence is to hope the reader will
       Suppose from June the sixth (the fatal day,
     Without whose epoch my poetic skill
       For want of facts would all be thrown away),
     But keeping Julia and Don Juan still
       In sight, that several months have pass'd; we 'll say
     'T was in November, but I 'm not so sure
     About the day--the era 's more obscure.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     We 'll talk of that anon.--'T is sweet to hear
       At midnight on the blue and moonlit deep
     The song and oar of Adria's gondolier,
       By distance mellow'd, o'er the waters sweep;
     'T is sweet to see the evening star appear;
       'T is sweet to listen as the night-winds creep
     From leaf to leaf; 't is sweet to view on high
     The rainbow, based on ocean, span the sky.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is sweet to hear the watch-dog's honest bark
       Bay deep-mouth'd welcome as we draw near home;
     'T is sweet to know there is an eye will mark
       Our coming, and look brighter when we come;
     'T is sweet to be awaken'd by the lark,
       Or lull'd by falling waters; sweet the hum
     Of bees, the voice of girls, the song of birds,
     The lisp of children, and their earliest words.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Sweet is the vintage, when the showering grapes
       In Bacchanal profusion reel to earth,
     Purple and gushing: sweet are our escapes
       From civic revelry to rural mirth;
     Sweet to the miser are his glittering heaps,
       Sweet to the father is his first-born's birth,
     Sweet is revenge--especially to women,
     Pillage to soldiers, prize-money to seamen.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Sweet is a legacy, and passing sweet
       The unexpected death of some old lady
     Or gentleman of seventy years complete,
       Who 've made 'us youth' wait too--too long already
     For an estate, or cash, or country seat,
       Still breaking, but with stamina so steady
     That all the Israelites are fit to mob its
     Next owner for their double-damn'd post-obits.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is sweet to win, no matter how, one's laurels,
       By blood or ink; 't is sweet to put an end
     To strife; 't is sometimes sweet to have our quarrels,
       Particularly with a tiresome friend:
     Sweet is old wine in bottles, ale in barrels;
       Dear is the helpless creature we defend
     Against the world; and dear the schoolboy spot
     We ne'er forget, though there we are forgot.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But sweeter still than this, than these, than all,
       Is first and passionate love--it stands alone,
     Like Adam's recollection of his fall;
       The tree of knowledge has been pluck'd--all 's known--
     And life yields nothing further to recall
       Worthy of this ambrosial sin, so shown,
     No doubt in fable, as the unforgiven
     Fire which Prometheus filch'd for us from heaven.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Man 's a strange animal, and makes strange use
       Of his own nature, and the various arts,
     And likes particularly to produce
       Some new experiment to show his parts;
     This is the age of oddities let loose,
       Where different talents find their different marts;
     You 'd best begin with truth, and when you 've lost your
     Labour, there 's a sure market for imposture.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     What opposite discoveries we have seen!
       (Signs of true genius, and of empty pockets.)
     One makes new noses, one a guillotine,
       One breaks your bones, one sets them in their sockets;
     But vaccination certainly has been
       A kind antithesis to Congreve's rockets,
     With which the Doctor paid off an old pox,
     By borrowing a new one from an ox.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Bread has been made (indifferent) from potatoes;
       And galvanism has set some corpses grinning,
     But has not answer'd like the apparatus
       Of the Humane Society's beginning
     By which men are unsuffocated gratis:
       What wondrous new machines have late been spinning!
     I said the small-pox has gone out of late;
     Perhaps it may be follow'd by the great.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is said the great came from America;
       Perhaps it may set out on its return,--
     The population there so spreads, they say
       'T is grown high time to thin it in its turn,
     With war, or plague, or famine, any way,
       So that civilisation they may learn;
     And which in ravage the more loathsome evil is--
     Their real lues, or our pseudo-syphilis?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This is the patent-age of new inventions
       For killing bodies, and for saving souls,
     All propagated with the best intentions;
       Sir Humphry Davy's lantern, by which coals
     Are safely mined for in the mode he mentions,
       Tombuctoo travels, voyages to the Poles,
     Are ways to benefit mankind, as true,
     Perhaps, as shooting them at Waterloo.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Man 's a phenomenon, one knows not what,
       And wonderful beyond all wondrous measure;
     'T is pity though, in this sublime world, that
       Pleasure 's a sin, and sometimes sin 's a pleasure;
     Few mortals know what end they would be at,
       But whether glory, power, or love, or treasure,
     The path is through perplexing ways, and when
     The goal is gain'd, we die, you know--and then--

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     What then?--I do not know, no more do you--
       And so good night.--Return we to our story:
     'T was in November, when fine days are few,
       And the far mountains wax a little hoary,
     And clap a white cape on their mantles blue;
       And the sea dashes round the promontory,
     And the loud breaker boils against the rock,
     And sober suns must set at five o'clock.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was, as the watchmen say, a cloudy night;
       No moon, no stars, the wind was low or loud
     By gusts, and many a sparkling hearth was bright
       With the piled wood, round which the family crowd;
     There 's something cheerful in that sort of light,
       Even as a summer sky 's without a cloud:
     I 'm fond of fire, and crickets, and all that,
     A lobster salad, and champagne, and chat.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was midnight--Donna Julia was in bed,
       Sleeping, most probably,--when at her door
     Arose a clatter might awake the dead,
       If they had never been awoke before,
     And that they have been so we all have read,
       And are to be so, at the least, once more;--
     The door was fasten'd, but with voice and fist
     First knocks were heard, then 'Madam--Madam--hist!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'For God's sake, Madam--Madam--here 's my master,
       With more than half the city at his back--
     Was ever heard of such a curst disaster!
       'T is not my fault--I kept good watch--Alack!
     Do pray undo the bolt a little faster--
       They 're on the stair just now, and in a crack
     Will all be here; perhaps he yet may fly--
     Surely the window 's not so very high!'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     By this time Don Alfonso was arrived,
       With torches, friends, and servants in great number;
     The major part of them had long been wived,
       And therefore paused not to disturb the slumber
     Of any wicked woman, who contrived
       By stealth her husband's temples to encumber:
     Examples of this kind are so contagious,
     Were one not punish'd, all would be outrageous.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I can't tell how, or why, or what suspicion
       Could enter into Don Alfonso's head;
     But for a cavalier of his condition
       It surely was exceedingly ill-bred,
     Without a word of previous admonition,
       To hold a levee round his lady's bed,
     And summon lackeys, arm'd with fire and sword,
     To prove himself the thing he most abhorr'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Poor Donna Julia, starting as from sleep
       (Mind--that I do not say--she had not slept),
     Began at once to scream, and yawn, and weep;
       Her maid Antonia, who was an adept,
     Contrived to fling the bed-clothes in a heap,
       As if she had just now from out them crept:
     I can't tell why she should take all this trouble
     To prove her mistress had been sleeping double.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But Julia mistress, and Antonia maid,
       Appear'd like two poor harmless women, who
     Of goblins, but still more of men afraid,
       Had thought one man might be deterr'd by two,
     And therefore side by side were gently laid,
       Until the hours of absence should run through,
     And truant husband should return, and say,
     'My dear, I was the first who came away.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now Julia found at length a voice, and cried,
       'In heaven's name, Don Alfonso, what d' ye mean?
     Has madness seized you? would that I had died
       Ere such a monster's victim I had been!
     What may this midnight violence betide,
       A sudden fit of drunkenness or spleen?
     Dare you suspect me, whom the thought would kill?
     Search, then, the room!'--Alfonso said, 'I will.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He search'd, they search'd, and rummaged everywhere,
       Closet and clothes' press, chest and window-seat,
     And found much linen, lace, and several pair
       Of stockings, slippers, brushes, combs, complete,
     With other articles of ladies fair,
       To keep them beautiful, or leave them neat:
     Arras they prick'd and curtains with their swords,
     And wounded several shutters, and some boards.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Under the bed they search'd, and there they found--
       No matter what--it was not that they sought;
     They open'd windows, gazing if the ground
       Had signs or footmarks, but the earth said nought;
     And then they stared each other's faces round:
       'T is odd, not one of all these seekers thought,
     And seems to me almost a sort of blunder,
     Of looking in the bed as well as under.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     During this inquisition, Julia's tongue
       Was not asleep--'Yes, search and search,' she cried,
     'Insult on insult heap, and wrong on wrong!
       It was for this that I became a bride!
     For this in silence I have suffer'd long
       A husband like Alfonso at my side;
     But now I 'll bear no more, nor here remain,
     If there be law or lawyers in all Spain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Yes, Don Alfonso! husband now no more,
       If ever you indeed deserved the name,
     Is 't worthy of your years?--you have threescore--
       Fifty, or sixty, it is all the same--
     Is 't wise or fitting, causeless to explore
       For facts against a virtuous woman's fame?
     Ungrateful, perjured, barbarous Don Alfonso,
     How dare you think your lady would go on so?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Is it for this I have disdain'd to hold
       The common privileges of my sex?
     That I have chosen a confessor so old
       And deaf, that any other it would vex,
     And never once he has had cause to scold,
       But found my very innocence perplex
     So much, he always doubted I was married--
     How sorry you will be when I 've miscarried!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Was it for this that no Cortejo e'er
       I yet have chosen from out the youth of Seville?
     Is it for this I scarce went anywhere,
       Except to bull-fights, mass, play, rout, and revel?
     Is it for this, whate'er my suitors were,
       I favor'd none--nay, was almost uncivil?
     Is it for this that General Count O'Reilly,
     Who took Algiers, declares I used him vilely?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Did not the Italian Musico Cazzani
       Sing at my heart six months at least in vain?
     Did not his countryman, Count Corniani,
       Call me the only virtuous wife in Spain?
     Were there not also Russians, English, many?
       The Count Strongstroganoff I put in pain,
     And Lord Mount Coffeehouse, the Irish peer,
     Who kill'd himself for love (with wine) last year.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Have I not had two bishops at my feet,
       The Duke of Ichar, and Don Fernan Nunez?
     And is it thus a faithful wife you treat?
       I wonder in what quarter now the moon is:
     I praise your vast forbearance not to beat
       Me also, since the time so opportune is--
     O, valiant man! with sword drawn and cock'd trigger,
     Now, tell me, don't you cut a pretty figure?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Was it for this you took your sudden journey.
       Under pretence of business indispensable
     With that sublime of rascals your attorney,
       Whom I see standing there, and looking sensible
     Of having play'd the fool? though both I spurn, he
       Deserves the worst, his conduct 's less defensible,
     Because, no doubt, 't was for his dirty fee,
     And not from any love to you nor me.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'If he comes here to take a deposition,
       By all means let the gentleman proceed;
     You 've made the apartment in a fit condition:
       There 's pen and ink for you, sir, when you need--
     Let every thing be noted with precision,
       I would not you for nothing should be fee'd--
     But, as my maid 's undrest, pray turn your spies out.'
     'Oh!' sobb'd Antonia, 'I could tear their eyes out.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'There is the closet, there the toilet, there
       The antechamber--search them under, over;
     There is the sofa, there the great arm-chair,
       The chimney--which would really hold a lover.
     I wish to sleep, and beg you will take care
       And make no further noise, till you discover
     The secret cavern of this lurking treasure--
     And when 't is found, let me, too, have that pleasure.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'And now, Hidalgo! now that you have thrown
       Doubt upon me, confusion over all,
     Pray have the courtesy to make it known
       Who is the man you search for? how d' ye cal
     Him? what 's his lineage? let him but be shown--
       I hope he 's young and handsome--is he tall?
     Tell me--and be assured, that since you stain
     My honour thus, it shall not be in vain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'At least, perhaps, he has not sixty years,
       At that age he would be too old for slaughter,
     Or for so young a husband's jealous fears
       (Antonia! let me have a glass of water).
     I am ashamed of having shed these tears,
       They are unworthy of my father's daughter;
     My mother dream'd not in my natal hour
     That I should fall into a monster's power.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Perhaps 't is of Antonia you are jealous,
       You saw that she was sleeping by my side
     When you broke in upon us with your fellows:
       Look where you please--we 've nothing, sir, to hide;
     Only another time, I trust, you 'll tell us,
       Or for the sake of decency abide
     A moment at the door, that we may be
     Drest to receive so much good company.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'And now, sir, I have done, and say no more;
       The little I have said may serve to show
     The guileless heart in silence may grieve o'er
       The wrongs to whose exposure it is slow:
     I leave you to your conscience as before,
       'T will one day ask you why you used me so?
     God grant you feel not then the bitterest grief!-
     Antonia! where 's my pocket-handkerchief?'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She ceased, and turn'd upon her pillow; pale
       She lay, her dark eyes flashing through their tears,
     Like skies that rain and lighten; as a veil,
       Waved and o'ershading her wan cheek, appears
     Her streaming hair; the black curls strive, but fail,
       To hide the glossy shoulder, which uprears
     Its snow through all;--her soft lips lie apart,
     And louder than her breathing beats her heart.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The Senhor Don Alfonso stood confused;
       Antonia bustled round the ransack'd room,
     And, turning up her nose, with looks abused
       Her master and his myrmidons, of whom
     Not one, except the attorney, was amused;
       He, like Achates, faithful to the tomb,
     So there were quarrels, cared not for the cause,
     Knowing they must be settled by the laws.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     With prying snub-nose, and small eyes, he stood,
       Following Antonia's motions here and there,
     With much suspicion in his attitude;
       For reputations he had little care;
     So that a suit or action were made good,
       Small pity had he for the young and fair,
     And ne'er believed in negatives, till these
     Were proved by competent false witnesses.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But Don Alfonso stood with downcast looks,
       And, truth to say, he made a foolish figure;
     When, after searching in five hundred nooks,
       And treating a young wife with so much rigour,
     He gain'd no point, except some self-rebukes,
       Added to those his lady with such vigour
     Had pour'd upon him for the last half-hour,
     Quick, thick, and heavy--as a thunder-shower.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     At first he tried to hammer an excuse,
       To which the sole reply was tears and sobs,
     And indications of hysterics, whose
       Prologue is always certain throes, and throbs,
     Gasps, and whatever else the owners choose:
       Alfonso saw his wife, and thought of Job's;
     He saw too, in perspective, her relations,
     And then he tried to muster all his patience.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He stood in act to speak, or rather stammer,
       But sage Antonia cut him short before
     The anvil of his speech received the hammer,
       With 'Pray, sir, leave the room, and say no more,
     Or madam dies.'--Alfonso mutter'd, 'D--n her,'
       But nothing else, the time of words was o'er;
     He cast a rueful look or two, and did,
     He knew not wherefore, that which he was bid.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     With him retired his 'posse comitatus,'
       The attorney last, who linger'd near the door
     Reluctantly, still tarrying there as late as
       Antonia let him--not a little sore
     At this most strange and unexplain'd 'hiatus'
       In Don Alfonso's facts, which just now wore
     An awkward look; as he revolved the case,
     The door was fasten'd in his legal face.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     No sooner was it bolted, than--Oh shame!
       O sin! Oh sorrow! and oh womankind!
     How can you do such things and keep your fame,
       Unless this world, and t' other too, be blind?
     Nothing so dear as an unfilch'd good name!
       But to proceed--for there is more behind:
     With much heartfelt reluctance be it said,
     Young Juan slipp'd half-smother'd, from the bed.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He had been hid--I don't pretend to say
       How, nor can I indeed describe the where--
     Young, slender, and pack'd easily, he lay,
       No doubt, in little compass, round or square;
     But pity him I neither must nor may
       His suffocation by that pretty pair;
     'T were better, sure, to die so, than be shut
     With maudlin Clarence in his Malmsey butt.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And, secondly, I pity not, because
       He had no business to commit a sin,
     Forbid by heavenly, fined by human laws,
       At least 't was rather early to begin;
     But at sixteen the conscience rarely gnaws
       So much as when we call our old debts in
     At sixty years, and draw the accompts of evil,
     And find a deuced balance with the devil.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Of his position I can give no notion:
       'T is written in the Hebrew Chronicle,
     How the physicians, leaving pill and potion,
       Prescribed, by way of blister, a young belle,
     When old King David's blood grew dull in motion,
       And that the medicine answer'd very well;
     Perhaps 't was in a different way applied,
     For David lived, but Juan nearly died.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     What 's to be done? Alfonso will be back
       The moment he has sent his fools away.
     Antonia's skill was put upon the rack,
       But no device could be brought into play--
     And how to parry the renew'd attack?
       Besides, it wanted but few hours of day:
     Antonia puzzled; Julia did not speak,
     But press'd her bloodless lip to Juan's cheek.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He turn'd his lip to hers, and with his hand
       Call'd back the tangles of her wandering hair;
     Even then their love they could not all command,
       And half forgot their danger and despair:
     Antonia's patience now was at a stand--
       'Come, come, 't is no time now for fooling there,'
     She whisper'd, in great wrath--'I must deposit
     This pretty gentleman within the closet:

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Pray, keep your nonsense for some luckier night--
       Who can have put my master in this mood?
     What will become on 't--I 'm in such a fright,
       The devil 's in the urchin, and no good--
     Is this a time for giggling? this a plight?
       Why, don't you know that it may end in blood?
     You 'll lose your life, and I shall lose my place,
     My mistress all, for that half-girlish face.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Had it but been for a stout cavalier
       Of twenty-five or thirty (come, make haste)--
     But for a child, what piece of work is here!
       I really, madam, wonder at your taste
     (Come, sir, get in)--my master must be near:
       There, for the present, at the least, he's fast,
     And if we can but till the morning keep
     Our counsel--(Juan, mind, you must not sleep).'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now, Don Alfonso entering, but alone,
       Closed the oration of the trusty maid:
     She loiter'd, and he told her to be gone,
       An order somewhat sullenly obey'd;
     However, present remedy was none,
       And no great good seem'd answer'd if she stay'd:
     Regarding both with slow and sidelong view,
     She snuff'd the candle, curtsied, and withdrew.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alfonso paused a minute--then begun
       Some strange excuses for his late proceeding;
     He would not justify what he had done,
       To say the best, it was extreme ill-breeding;
     But there were ample reasons for it, none
       Of which he specified in this his pleading:
     His speech was a fine sample, on the whole,
     Of rhetoric, which the learn'd call 'rigmarole.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Julia said nought; though all the while there rose
       A ready answer, which at once enables
     A matron, who her husband's foible knows,
       By a few timely words to turn the tables,
     Which, if it does not silence, still must pose,--
       Even if it should comprise a pack of fables;
     'T is to retort with firmness, and when he
     Suspects with one, do you reproach with three.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Julia, in fact, had tolerable grounds,--
       Alfonso's loves with Inez were well known,
     But whether 't was that one's own guilt confounds--
       But that can't be, as has been often shown,
     A lady with apologies abounds;--
       It might be that her silence sprang alone
     From delicacy to Don Juan's ear,
     To whom she knew his mother's fame was dear.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There might be one more motive, which makes two;
       Alfonso ne'er to Juan had alluded,--
     Mention'd his jealousy but never who
       Had been the happy lover, he concluded,
     Conceal'd amongst his premises; 't is true,
       His mind the more o'er this its mystery brooded;
     To speak of Inez now were, one may say,
     Like throwing Juan in Alfonso's way.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A hint, in tender cases, is enough;
       Silence is best, besides there is a tact
     (That modern phrase appears to me sad stuff,
       But it will serve to keep my verse compact)-
     Which keeps, when push'd by questions rather rough,
       A lady always distant from the fact:
     The charming creatures lie with such a grace,
     There 's nothing so becoming to the face.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They blush, and we believe them; at least I
       Have always done so; 't is of no great use,
     In any case, attempting a reply,
       For then their eloquence grows quite profuse;
     And when at length they 're out of breath, they sigh,
       And cast their languid eyes down, and let loose
     A tear or two, and then we make it up;
     And then--and then--and then--sit down and sup.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alfonso closed his speech, and begg'd her pardon,
       Which Julia half withheld, and then half granted,
     And laid conditions he thought very hard on,
       Denying several little things he wanted:
     He stood like Adam lingering near his garden,
       With useless penitence perplex'd and haunted,
     Beseeching she no further would refuse,
     When, lo! he stumbled o'er a pair of shoes.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A pair of shoes!--what then? not much, if they
       Are such as fit with ladies' feet, but these
     (No one can tell how much I grieve to say)
       Were masculine; to see them, and to seize,
     Was but a moment's act.--Ah! well-a-day!
       My teeth begin to chatter, my veins freeze--
     Alfonso first examined well their fashion,
     And then flew out into another passion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He left the room for his relinquish'd sword,
       And Julia instant to the closet flew.
     'Fly, Juan, fly! for heaven's sake--not a word--
       The door is open--you may yet slip through
     The passage you so often have explored--
       Here is the garden-key--Fly--fly--Adieu!
     Haste--haste! I hear Alfonso's hurrying feet--
     Day has not broke--there 's no one in the street:

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     None can say that this was not good advice,
       The only mischief was, it came too late;
     Of all experience 't is the usual price,
       A sort of income-tax laid on by fate:
     Juan had reach'd the room-door in a. trice,
       And might have done so by the garden-gate,
     But met Alfonso in his dressing-gown,
     Who threaten'd death--so Juan knock'd him down.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Dire was the scuffle, and out went the light;
       Antonia cried out 'Rape!' and Julia 'Fire!'
     But not a servant stirr'd to aid the fight.
       Alfonso, pommell'd to his heart's desire,
     Swore lustily he'd be revenged this night;
       And Juan, too, blasphemed an octave higher;
     His blood was up: though young, he was a Tartar,
     And not at all disposed to prove a martyr.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alfonso's sword had dropp'd ere he could draw it,
       And they continued battling hand to hand,
     For Juan very luckily ne'er saw it;
       His temper not being under great command,
     If at that moment he had chanced to claw it,
       Alfonso's days had not been in the land
     Much longer.--Think of husbands', lovers' lives!
     And how ye may be doubly widows--wives!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alfonso grappled to detain the foe,
       And Juan throttled him to get away,
     And blood ('t was from the nose) began to flow;
       At last, as they more faintly wrestling lay,
     Juan contrived to give an awkward blow,
       And then his only garment quite gave way;
     He fled, like Joseph, leaving it; but there,
     I doubt, all likeness ends between the pair.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Lights came at length, and men, and maids, who found
       An awkward spectacle their eyes before;
     Antonia in hysterics, Julia swoon'd,
       Alfonso leaning, breathless, by the door;
     Some half-torn drapery scatter'd on the ground,
       Some blood, and several footsteps, but no more:
     Juan the gate gain'd, turn'd the key about,
     And liking not the inside, lock'd the out.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Here ends this canto.--Need I sing, or say,
       How Juan naked, favour'd by the night,
     Who favours what she should not, found his way,
       And reach'd his home in an unseemly plight?
     The pleasant scandal which arose next day,
       The nine days' wonder which was brought to light,
     And how Alfonso sued for a divorce,
     Were in the English newspapers, of course.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If you would like to see the whole proceedings,
       The depositions, and the cause at full,
     The names of all the witnesses, the pleadings
       Of counsel to nonsuit, or to annul,
     There 's more than one edition, and the readings
       Are various, but they none of them are dull;
     The best is that in short-hand ta'en by Gurney,
     Who to Madrid on purpose made a journey.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But Donna Inez, to divert the train
       Of one of the most circulating scandals
     That had for centuries been known in Spain,
       At least since the retirement of the Vandals,
     First vow'd (and never had she vow'd in vain)
       To Virgin Mary several pounds of candles;
     And then, by the advice of some old ladies,
     She sent her son to be shipp'd off from Cadiz.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She had resolved that he should travel through
       All European climes, by land or sea,
     To mend his former morals, and get new,
       Especially in France and Italy
     (At least this is the thing most people do).
       Julia was sent into a convent: she
     Grieved, but, perhaps, her feelings may be better
     Shown in the following copy of her Letter:--

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'They tell me 't is decided; you depart:
       'T is wise--'t is well, but not the less a pain;
     I have no further claim on your young heart,
       Mine is the victim, and would be again;
     To love too much has been the only art
       I used;--I write in haste, and if a stain
     Be on this sheet, 't is not what it appears;
     My eyeballs burn and throb, but have no tears.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'I loved, I love you, for this love have lost
       State, station, heaven, mankind's, my own esteem,
     And yet can not regret what it hath cost,
       So dear is still the memory of that dream;
     Yet, if I name my guilt, 't is not to boast,
       None can deem harshlier of me than I deem:
     I trace this scrawl because I cannot rest--
     I 've nothing to reproach, or to request.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Man's love is of man's life a thing apart,
       'T is woman's whole existence; man may range
     The court, camp, church, the vessel, and the mart;
       Sword, gown, gain, glory, offer in exchange
     Pride, fame, ambition, to fill up his heart,
       And few there are whom these cannot estrange;
     Men have all these resources, we but one,
     To love again, and be again undone.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'You will proceed in pleasure, and in pride,
       Beloved and loving many; all is o'er
     For me on earth, except some years to hide
       My shame and sorrow deep in my heart's core;
     These I could bear, but cannot cast aside
       The passion which still rages as before--
     And so farewell--forgive me, love me--No,
     That word is idle now--but let it go.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'My breast has been all weakness, is so yet;
       But still I think I can collect my mind;
     My blood still rushes where my spirit 's set,
       As roll the waves before the settled wind;
     My heart is feminine, nor can forget--
       To all, except one image, madly blind;
     So shakes the needle, and so stands the pole,
     As vibrates my fond heart to my fix'd soul.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'I have no more to say, but linger still,
       And dare not set my seal upon this sheet,
     And yet I may as well the task fulfil,
       My misery can scarce be more complete:
     I had not lived till now, could sorrow kill;
       Death shuns the wretch who fain the blow would meet,
     And I must even survive this last adieu,
     And bear with life, to love and pray for you!'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This note was written upon gilt-edged paper
       With a neat little crow-quill, slight and new:
     Her small white hand could hardly reach the taper,
       It trembled as magnetic needles do,
     And yet she did not let one tear escape her;
       The seal a sun-flower; 'Elle vous suit partout,'
     The motto cut upon a white cornelian;
     The wax was superfine, its hue vermilion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This was Don Juan's earliest scrape; but whether
       I shall proceed with his adventures is
     Dependent on the public altogether;
       We 'll see, however, what they say to this:
     Their favour in an author's cap 's a feather,
       And no great mischief 's done by their caprice;
     And if their approbation we experience,
     Perhaps they 'll have some more about a year hence.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     My poem 's epic, and is meant to be
       Divided in twelve books; each book containing,
     With love, and war, a heavy gale at sea,
       A list of ships, and captains, and kings reigning,
     New characters; the episodes are three:
       A panoramic view of hell 's in training,
     After the style of Virgil and of Homer,
     So that my name of Epic 's no misnomer.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     All these things will be specified in time,
       With strict regard to Aristotle's rules,
     The Vade Mecum of the true sublime,
       Which makes so many poets, and some fools:
     Prose poets like blank-verse, I 'm fond of rhyme,
       Good workmen never quarrel with their tools;
     I 've got new mythological machinery,
     And very handsome supernatural scenery.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There 's only one slight difference between
       Me and my epic brethren gone before,
     And here the advantage is my own, I ween
       (Not that I have not several merits more,
     But this will more peculiarly be seen);
       They so embellish, that 't is quite a bore
     Their labyrinth of fables to thread through,
     Whereas this story 's actually true.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If any person doubt it, I appeal
       To history, tradition, and to facts,
     To newspapers, whose truth all know and feel,
       To plays in five, and operas in three acts;
     All these confirm my statement a good deal,
       But that which more completely faith exacts
     Is that myself, and several now in Seville,
     Saw Juan's last elopement with the devil.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If ever I should condescend to prose,
       I 'll write poetical commandments, which
     Shall supersede beyond all doubt all those
       That went before; in these I shall enrich
     My text with many things that no one knows,
       And carry precept to the highest pitch:
     I 'll call the work 'Longinus o'er a Bottle,
     Or, Every Poet his own Aristotle.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thou shalt believe in Milton, Dryden, Pope;
       Thou shalt not set up Wordsworth, Coleridge, Southey;
     Because the first is crazed beyond all hope,
       The second drunk, the third so quaint and mouthy:
     With Crabbe it may be difficult to cope,
       And Campbell's Hippocrene is somewhat drouthy:
     Thou shalt not steal from Samuel Rogers, nor
     Commit--flirtation with the muse of Moore.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If any person should presume to assert
       This story is not moral, first, I pray,
     That they will not cry out before they 're hurt,
       Then that they 'll read it o'er again, and say
     (But, doubtless, nobody will be so pert)
       That this is not a moral tale, though gay;
     Besides, in Canto Twelfth, I mean to show
     The very place where wicked people go.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If, after all, there should be some so blind
       To their own good this warning to despise,
     Led by some tortuosity of mind,
       Not to believe my verse and their own eyes,
     And cry that they 'the moral cannot find,'
       I tell him, if a clergyman, he lies;
     Should captains the remark, or critics, make,
     They also lie too--under a mistake.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The public approbation I expect,
       And beg they 'll take my word about the moral,
     Which I with their amusement will connect
       (So children cutting teeth receive a coral);
     Meantime, they 'll doubtless please to recollect
       My epical pretensions to the laurel:
     For fear some prudish readers should grow skittish,
     I 've bribed my grandmother's review--the British.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I sent it in a letter to the Editor,
       Who thank'd me duly by return of post--
     I 'm for a handsome article his creditor;
       Yet, if my gentle Muse he please to roast,
     And break a promise after having made it her,
       Denying the receipt of what it cost,
     And smear his page with gall instead of honey,
     All I can say is--that he had the money.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I think that with this holy new alliance
       I may ensure the public, and defy
     All other magazines of art or science,
       Daily, or monthly, or three monthly; I
     Have not essay'd to multiply their clients,
       Because they tell me 't were in vain to try,
     And that the Edinburgh Review and Quarterly
     Treat a dissenting author very martyrly.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Non ego hoc ferrem calida juventa
       Consule Planco,' Horace said, and so
     Say I; by which quotation there is meant a
       Hint that some six or seven good years ago
     (Long ere I dreamt of dating from the Brenta)
       I was most ready to return a blow,
     And would not brook at all this sort of thing
     In my hot youth--when George the Third was King.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But now at thirty years my hair is grey
       (I wonder what it will be like at forty?
     I thought of a peruke the other day)--
       My heart is not much greener; and, in short, I
     Have squander'd my whole summer while 't was May,
       And feel no more the spirit to retort; I
     Have spent my life, both interest and principal,
     And deem not, what I deem'd, my soul invincible.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     No more--no more--Oh! never more on me
       The freshness of the heart can fall like dew,
     Which out of all the lovely things we see
       Extracts emotions beautiful and new,
     Hived in our bosoms like the bag o' the bee:
       Think'st thou the honey with those objects grew?
     Alas! 't was not in them, but in thy power
     To double even the sweetness of a flower.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     No more--no more--Oh! never more, my heart,
       Canst thou be my sole world, my universe!
     Once all in all, but now a thing apart,
       Thou canst not be my blessing or my curse:
     The illusion 's gone for ever, and thou art
       Insensible, I trust, but none the worse,
     And in thy stead I 've got a deal of judgment,
     Though heaven knows how it ever found a lodgment.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     My days of love are over; me no more
       The charms of maid, wife, and still less of widow,
     Can make the fool of which they made before,--
       In short, I must not lead the life I did do;
     The credulous hope of mutual minds is o'er,
       The copious use of claret is forbid too,
     So for a good old-gentlemanly vice,
     I think I must take up with avarice.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Ambition was my idol, which was broken
       Before the shrines of Sorrow, and of Pleasure;
     And the two last have left me many a token
       O'er which reflection may be made at leisure:
     Now, like Friar Bacon's brazen head, I 've spoken,
       'Time is, Time was, Time 's past:'--a chymic treasure
     Is glittering youth, which I have spent betimes--
     My heart in passion, and my head on rhymes.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     What is the end of Fame? 't is but to fill
       A certain portion of uncertain paper:
     Some liken it to climbing up a hill,
       Whose summit, like all hills, is lost in vapour;
     For this men write, speak, preach, and heroes kill,
       And bards burn what they call their 'midnight taper,'
     To have, when the original is dust,
     A name, a wretched picture, and worse bust.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     What are the hopes of man? Old Egypt's King
       Cheops erected the first pyramid
     And largest, thinking it was just the thing
       To keep his memory whole, and mummy hid;
     But somebody or other rummaging,
       Burglariously broke his coffin's lid:
     Let not a monument give you or me hopes,
     Since not a pinch of dust remains of Cheops.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But I being fond of true philosophy,
       Say very often to myself, 'Alas!
     All things that have been born were born to die,
       And flesh (which Death mows down to hay) is grass;
     You 've pass'd your youth not so unpleasantly,
       And if you had it o'er again--'t would pass--
     So thank your stars that matters are no worse,
     And read your Bible, sir, and mind your purse.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But for the present, gentle reader! and
       Still gentler purchaser! the bard--that 's I--
     Must, with permission, shake you by the hand,
       And so 'Your humble servant, and good-b'ye!'
     We meet again, if we should understand
       Each other; and if not, I shall not try
     Your patience further than by this short sample--
     'T were well if others follow'd my example.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Go, little book, from this my solitude!
       I cast thee on the waters--go thy ways!
     And if, as I believe, thy vein be good,
       The world will find thee after many days.'
     When Southey's read, and Wordsworth understood,
       I can't help putting in my claim to praise--
     The four first rhymes are Southey's every line:
     For God's sake, reader! take them not for mine.

TITLE Don Juan, II 

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O ye! who teach the ingenuous youth of nations,
       Holland, France, England, Germany, or Spain,
     I pray ye flog them upon all occasions,
       It mends their morals, never mind the pain:
     The best of mothers and of educations
       In Juan's case were but employ'd in vain,
     Since, in a way that 's rather of the oddest, he
     Became divested of his native modesty.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Had he but been placed at a public school,
       In the third form, or even in the fourth,
     His daily task had kept his fancy cool,
       At least, had he been nurtured in the north;
     Spain may prove an exception to the rule,
       But then exceptions always prove its worth--
     A lad of sixteen causing a divorce
     Puzzled his tutors very much, of course.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I can't say that it puzzles me at all,
       If all things be consider'd: first, there was
     His lady--mother, mathematical,
       A--never mind; his tutor, an old ass;
     A pretty woman (that 's quite natural,
       Or else the thing had hardly come to pass);
     A husband rather old, not much in unity
     With his young wife--a time, and opportunity.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Well--well, the world must turn upon its axis,
       And all mankind turn with it, heads or tails,
     And live and die, make love and pay our taxes,
       And as the veering wind shifts, shift our sails;
     The king commands us, and the doctor quacks us,
       The priest instructs, and so our life exhales,
     A little breath, love, wine, ambition, fame,
     Fighting, devotion, dust,--perhaps a name.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I said that Juan had been sent to Cadiz--
       A pretty town, I recollect it well--
     'T is there the mart of the colonial trade is
       (Or was, before Peru learn'd to rebel),
     And such sweet girls--I mean, such graceful ladies,
       Their very walk would make your bosom swell;
     I can't describe it, though so much it strike,
     Nor liken it--I never saw the like:

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     An Arab horse, a stately stag, a barb
       New broke, a cameleopard, a gazelle,
     No--none of these will do;--and then their garb!
       Their veil and petticoat--Alas! to dwell
     Upon such things would very near absorb
       A canto--then their feet and ankles,--well,
     Thank Heaven I 've got no metaphor quite ready
     (And so, my sober Muse--come, let 's be steady--

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Chaste Muse!--well, if you must, you must)--the veil
       Thrown back a moment with the glancing hand,
     While the o'erpowering eye, that turns you pale,
       Flashes into the heart:--All sunny land
     Of love! when I forget you, may I fail
       To--say my prayers--but never was there plann'd
     A dress through which the eyes give such a volley,
     Excepting the Venetian Fazzioli.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But to our tale: the Donna Inez sent
       Her son to Cadiz only to embark;
     To stay there had not answer'd her intent,
       But why?--we leave the reader in the dark--
     'T was for a voyage that the young man was meant,
       As if a Spanish ship were Noah's ark,
     To wean him from the wickedness of earth,
     And send him like a dove of promise forth.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Don Juan bade his valet pack his things
       According to direction, then received
     A lecture and some money: for four springs
       He was to travel; and though Inez grieved
     (As every kind of parting has its stings),
       She hoped he would improve--perhaps believed:
     A letter, too, she gave (he never read it)
     Of good advice--and two or three of credit.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In the mean time, to pass her hours away,
       Brave Inez now set up a Sunday school
     For naughty children, who would rather play
       (Like truant rogues) the devil, or the fool;
     Infants of three years old were taught that day,
       Dunces were whipt, or set upon a stool:
     The great success of Juan's education,
     Spurr'd her to teach another generation.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan embark'd--the ship got under way,
       The wind was fair, the water passing rough:
     A devil of a sea rolls in that bay,
       As I, who 've cross'd it oft, know well enough;
     And, standing upon deck, the dashing spray
       Flies in one's face, and makes it weather-tough:
     And there he stood to take, and take again,
     His first--perhaps his last--farewell of Spain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I can't but say it is an awkward sight
       To see one's native land receding through
     The growing waters; it unmans one quite,
       Especially when life is rather new:
     I recollect Great Britain's coast looks white,
       But almost every other country 's blue,
     When gazing on them, mystified by distance,
     We enter on our nautical existence.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     So Juan stood, bewilder'd on the deck:
       The wind sung, cordage strain'd, and sailors swore,
     And the ship creak'd, the town became a speck,
       From which away so fair and fast they bore.
     The best of remedies is a beef-steak
       Against sea-sickness: try it, sir, before
     You sneer, and I assure you this is true,
     For I have found it answer--so may you.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Don Juan stood, and, gazing from the stern,
       Beheld his native Spain receding far:
     First partings form a lesson hard to learn,
       Even nations feel this when they go to war;
     There is a sort of unexprest concern,
       A kind of shock that sets one's heart ajar:
     At leaving even the most unpleasant people
     And places, one keeps looking at the steeple.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But Juan had got many things to leave,
       His mother, and a mistress, and no wife,
     So that he had much better cause to grieve
       Than many persons more advanced in life;
     And if we now and then a sigh must heave
       At quitting even those we quit in strife,
     No doubt we weep for those the heart endears--
     That is, till deeper griefs congeal our tears.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     So Juan wept, as wept the captive Jews
       By Babel's waters, still remembering Sion:
     I 'd weep,--but mine is not a weeping Muse,
       And such light griefs are not a thing to die on;
     Young men should travel, if but to amuse
       Themselves; and the next time their servants tie on
     Behind their carriages their new portmanteau,
     Perhaps it may be lined with this my canto.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Juan wept, and much he sigh'd and thought,
       While his salt tears dropp'd into the salt sea,
     'Sweets to the sweet' (I like so much to quote;
       You must excuse this extract, 't is where she,
     The Queen of Denmark, for Ophelia brought
       Flowers to the grave); and, sobbing often, he
     Reflected on his present situation,
     And seriously resolved on reformation.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Farewell, my Spain! a long farewell!' he cried,
       'Perhaps I may revisit thee no more,
     But die, as many an exiled heart hath died,
       Of its own thirst to see again thy shore:
     Farewell, where Guadalquivir's waters glide!
       Farewell, my mother! and, since all is o'er,
     Farewell, too, dearest Julia!--(Here he drew
     Her letter out again, and read it through.)

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'And, oh! if e'er I should forget, I swear--
       But that 's impossible, and cannot be--
     Sooner shall this blue ocean melt to air,
       Sooner shall earth resolve itself to sea,
     Than I resign thine image, oh, my fair!
       Or think of any thing excepting thee;
     A mind diseased no remedy can physic
     (Here the ship gave a lurch, and he grew sea-sick).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Sooner shall heaven kiss earth (here he fell sicker),
       O, Julia! what is every other wo?
     (For God's sake let me have a glass of liquor;
       Pedro, Battista, help me down below.)
     Julia, my love! (you rascal, Pedro, quicker)--
       O, Julia! (this curst vessel pitches so)--
     Beloved Julia, hear me still beseeching!'
     (Here he grew inarticulate with retching.)

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He felt that chilling heaviness of heart,
       Or rather stomach, which, alas! attends,
     Beyond the best apothecary's art,
       The loss of love, the treachery of friends,
     Or death of those we dote on, when a part
       Of us dies with them as each fond hope ends:
     No doubt he would have been much more pathetic,
     But the sea acted as a strong emetic. I

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Love 's a capricious power: I 've known it hold
       Out through a fever caused by its own heat,
     But be much puzzled by a cough and cold,
       And find a quincy very hard to treat;
     Against all noble maladies he 's bold,
       But vulgar illnesses don't like to meet,
     Nor that a sneeze should interrupt his sigh,
     Nor inflammations redden his blind eye.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But worst of all is nausea, or a pain
       About the lower region of the bowels;
     Love, who heroically breathes a vein,
       Shrinks from the application of hot towels,
     And purgatives are dangerous to his reign,
       Sea-sickness death: his love was perfect, how else
     Could Juan's passion, while the billows roar,
     Resist his stomach, ne'er at sea before?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The ship, call'd the most holy 'Trinidada,'
       Was steering duly for the port Leghorn;
     For there the Spanish family Moncada
       Were settled long ere Juan's sire was born:
     They were relations, and for them he had a
       Letter of introduction, which the morn
     Of his departure had been sent him by
     His Spanish friends for those in Italy.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     His suite consisted of three servants and
       A tutor, the licentiate Pedrillo,
     Who several languages did understand,
       But now lay sick and speechless on his pillow,
     And rocking in his hammock, long'd for land,
       His headache being increased by every billow;
     And the waves oozing through the port-hole made
     His berth a little damp, and him afraid.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was not without some reason, for the wind
       Increased at night, until it blew a gale;
     And though 't was not much to a naval mind,
       Some landsmen would have look'd a little pale,
     For sailors are, in fact, a different kind:
       At sunset they began to take in sail,
     For the sky show'd it would come on to blow,
     And carry away, perhaps, a mast or so.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     At one o'clock the wind with sudden shift
       Threw the ship right into the trough of the sea,
     Which struck her aft, and made an awkward rift,
       Started the stern-post, also shatter'd the
     Whole of her stern-frame, and, ere she could lift
       Herself from out her present jeopardy,
     The rudder tore away: 't was time to sound
     The pumps, and there were four feet water found.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     One gang of people instantly was put
       Upon the pumps and the remainder set
     To get up part of the cargo, and what not;
       But they could not come at the leak as yet;
     At last they did get at it really, but
       Still their salvation was an even bet:
     The water rush'd through in a way quite puzzling,
     While they thrust sheets, shirts, jackets, bales of muslin,

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Into the opening; but all such ingredients
       Would have been vain, and they must have gone down,
     Despite of all their efforts and expedients,
       But for the pumps: I 'm glad to make them known
     To all the brother tars who may have need hence,
       For fifty tons of water were upthrown
     By them per hour, and they had all been undone,
     But for the maker, Mr. Mann, of London.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     As day advanced the weather seem'd to abate,
       And then the leak they reckon'd to reduce,
     And keep the ship afloat, though three feet yet
       Kept two hand and one chain-pump still in use.
     The wind blew fresh again: as it grew late
       A squall came on, and while some guns broke loose,
     A gust--which all descriptive power transcends--
     Laid with one blast the ship on her beam ends.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There she lay motionless, and seem'd upset;
       The water left the hold, and wash'd the decks,
     And made a scene men do not soon forget;
       For they remember battles, fires, and wrecks,
     Or any other thing that brings regret,
       Or breaks their hopes, or hearts, or heads, or necks:
     Thus drownings are much talk'd of by the divers,
     And swimmers, who may chance to be survivors.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Immediately the masts were cut away,
       Both main and mizen; first the mizen went,
     The main-mast follow'd: but the ship still lay
       Like a mere log, and baffled our intent.
     Foremast and bowsprit were cut down, and they
       Eased her at last (although we never meant
     To part with all till every hope was blighted),
     And then with violence the old ship righted.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It may be easily supposed, while this
       Was going on, some people were unquiet,
     That passengers would find it much amiss
       To lose their lives, as well as spoil their diet;
     That even the able seaman, deeming his
       Days nearly o'er, might be disposed to riot,
     As upon such occasions tars will ask
     For grog, and sometimes drink rum from the cask.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There 's nought, no doubt, so much the spirit calms
       As rum and true religion: thus it was,
     Some plunder'd, some drank spirits, some sung psalms,
       The high wind made the treble, and as bas
     The hoarse harsh waves kept time; fright cured the qualms
       Of all the luckless landsmen's sea-sick maws:
     Strange sounds of wailing, blasphemy, devotion,
     Clamour'd in chorus to the roaring ocean.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Perhaps more mischief had been done, but for
       Our Juan, who, with sense beyond his years,
     Got to the spirit-room, and stood before
       It with a pair of pistols; and their fears,
     As if Death were more dreadful by his door
       Of fire than water, spite of oaths and tears,
     Kept still aloof the crew, who, ere they sunk,
     Thought it would be becoming to die drunk.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Give us more grog,' they cried, 'for it will be
       All one an hour hence.' Juan answer'd, 'No!
     'T is true that death awaits both you and me,
       But let us die like men, not sink below
     Like brutes;'--and thus his dangerous post kept he,
       And none liked to anticipate the blow;
     And even Pedrillo, his most reverend tutor,
     Was for some rum a disappointed suitor.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The good old gentleman was quite aghast,
       And made a loud and pious lamentation;
     Repented all his sins, and made a last
       Irrevocable vow of reformation;
     Nothing should tempt him more (this peril past)
       To quit his academic occupation,
     In cloisters of the classic Salamanca,
     To follow Juan's wake, like Sancho Panca.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But now there came a flash of hope once more;
       Day broke, and the wind lull'd: the masts were gone,
     The leak increased; shoals round her, but no shore,
       The vessel swam, yet still she held her own.
     They tried the pumps again, and though before
       Their desperate efforts seem'd all useless grown,
     A glimpse of sunshine set some hands to bale--
     The stronger pump'd, the weaker thrumm'd a sail.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Under the vessel's keel the sail was past,
       And for the moment it had some effect;
     But with a leak, and not a stick of mast,
       Nor rag of canvas, what could they expect?
     But still 't is best to struggle to the last,
       'T is never too late to be wholly wreck'd:
     And though 't is true that man can only die once,
     'T is not so pleasant in the Gulf of Lyons.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There winds and waves had hurl'd them, and from thence,
       Without their will, they carried them away;
     For they were forced with steering to dispense,
       And never had as yet a quiet day
     On which they might repose, or even commence
       A jurymast or rudder, or could say
     The ship would swim an hour, which, by good luck,
     Still swam--though not exactly like a duck.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The wind, in fact, perhaps was rather less,
       But the ship labour'd so, they scarce could hope
     To weather out much longer; the distress
       Was also great with which they had to cope
     For want of water, and their solid mess
       Was scant enough: in vain the telescope
     Was used--nor sail nor shore appear'd in sight,
     Nought but the heavy sea, and coming night.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Again the weather threaten'd,--again blew
       A gale, and in the fore and after hold
     Water appear'd; yet, though the people knew
       All this, the most were patient, and some bold,
     Until the chains and leathers were worn through
       Of all our pumps:--a wreck complete she roll'd,
     At mercy of the waves, whose mercies are
     Like human beings during civil war.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then came the carpenter, at last, with tears
       In his rough eyes, and told the captain he
     Could do no more: he was a man in years,
       And long had voyaged through many a stormy sea,
     And if he wept at length, they were not fears
       That made his eyelids as a woman's be,
     But he, poor fellow, had a wife and children,--
     Two things for dying people quite bewildering.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The ship was evidently settling now
       Fast by the head; and, all distinction gone,
     Some went to prayers again, and made a vow
       Of candles to their saints--but there were none
     To pay them with; and some look'd o'er the bow;
       Some hoisted out the boats; and there was one
     That begg'd Pedrillo for an absolution,
     Who told him to be damn'd--in his confusion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some lash'd them in their hammocks; some put on
       Their best clothes, as if going to a fair;
     Some cursed the day on which they saw the sun,
       And gnash'd their teeth, and, howling, tore their hair;
     And others went on as they had begun,
       Getting the boats out, being well aware
     That a tight boat will live in a rough sea,
     Unless with breakers close beneath her lee.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The worst of all was, that in their condition,
       Having been several days in great distress,
     'T was difficult to get out such provision
       As now might render their long suffering less:
     Men, even when dying, dislike inanition;
       Their stock was damaged by the weather's stress:
     Two casks of biscuit and a keg of butter
     Were all that could be thrown into the cutter.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But in the long-boat they contrived to stow
       Some pounds of bread, though injured by the wet;
     Water, a twenty-gallon cask or so;
       Six flasks of wine; and they contrived to get
     A portion of their beef up from below,
       And with a piece of pork, moreover, met,
     But scarce enough to serve them for a luncheon--
     Then there was rum, eight gallons in a puncheon.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The other boats, the yawl and pinnace, had
       Been stove in the beginning of the gale;
     And the long-boat's condition was but bad,
       As there were but two blankets for a sail,
     And one oar for a mast, which a young lad
       Threw in by good luck over the ship's rail;
     And two boats could not hold, far less be stored,
     To save one half the people then on board.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was twilight, and the sunless day went down
       Over the waste of waters; like a veil,
     Which, if withdrawn, would but disclose the frown
       Of one whose hate is mask'd but to assail,
     Thus to their hopeless eyes the night was shown,
       And grimly darkled o'er the faces pale,
     And the dim desolate deep: twelve days had Fear
     Been their familiar, and now Death was here.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some trial had been making at a raft,
       With little hope in such a rolling sea,
     A sort of thing at which one would have laugh'd,
       If any laughter at such times could be,
     Unless with people who too much have quaff'd,
       And have a kind of wild and horrid glee,
     Half epileptical and half hysterical:--
     Their preservation would have been a miracle.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     At half-past eight o'clock, booms, hencoops, spars,
       And all things, for a chance, had been cast loose,
     That still could keep afloat the struggling tars,
       For yet they strove, although of no great use:
     There was no light in heaven but a few stars,
       The boats put off o'ercrowded with their crews;
     She gave a heel, and then a lurch to port,
     And, going down head foremost--sunk, in short.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then rose from sea to sky the wild farewell--
       Then shriek'd the timid, and stood still the brave,
     Then some leap'd overboard with dreadful yell,
       As eager to anticipate their grave;
     And the sea yawn'd around her like a hell,
       And down she suck'd with her the whirling wave,
     Like one who grapples with his enemy,
     And strives to strangle him before he die.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And first one universal shriek there rush'd,
       Louder than the loud ocean, like a crash
     Of echoing thunder; and then all was hush'd,
       Save the wild wind and the remorseless dash
     Of billows; but at intervals there gush'd,
       Accompanied with a convulsive splash,
     A solitary shriek, the bubbling cry
     Of some strong swimmer in his agony.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The boats, as stated, had got off before,
       And in them crowded several of the crew;
     And yet their present hope was hardly more
       Than what it had been, for so strong it blew
     There was slight chance of reaching any shore;
       And then they were too many, though so few--
     Nine in the cutter, thirty in the boat,
     Were counted in them when they got afloat.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     All the rest perish'd; near two hundred souls
       Had left their bodies; and what 's worse, alas!
     When over Catholics the ocean rolls,
       They must wait several weeks before a mass
     Takes off one peck of purgatorial coals,
       Because, till people know what 's come to pass,
     They won't lay out their money on the dead--
     It costs three francs for every mass that 's said.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan got into the long-boat, and there
       Contrived to help Pedrillo to a place;
     It seem'd as if they had exchanged their care,
       For Juan wore the magisterial face
     Which courage gives, while poor Pedrillo's pair
       Of eyes were crying for their owner's case:
     Battista; though (a name call'd shortly Tita),
     Was lost by getting at some aqua-vita.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Pedro, his valet, too, he tried to save,
       But the same cause, conducive to his loss,
     Left him so drunk, he jump'd into the wave
       As o'er the cutter's edge he tried to cross,
     And so he found a wine-and-watery grave;
       They could not rescue him although so close,
     Because the sea ran higher every minute,
     And for the boat--the crew kept crowding in it.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A small old spaniel,--which had been Don Jose's,
       His father's, whom he loved, as ye may think,
     For on such things the memory reposes
       With tenderness--stood howling on the brink,
     Knowing (dogs have such intellectual noses!),
       No doubt, the vessel was about to sink;
     And Juan caught him up, and ere he stepp'd
     Off, threw him in, then after him he leap'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He also stuff'd his money where he could
       About his person, and Pedrillo's too,
     Who let him do, in fact, whate'er he would,
       Not knowing what himself to say, or do,
     As every rising wave his dread renew'd;
       But Juan, trusting they might still get through,
     And deeming there were remedies for any ill,
     Thus re-embark'd his tutor and his spaniel.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was a rough night, and blew so stiffly yet,
       That the sail was becalm'd between the seas,
     Though on the wave's high top too much to set,
       They dared not take it in for all the breeze:
     Each sea curl'd o'er the stern, and kept them wet,
       And made them bale without a moment's ease,
     So that themselves as well as hopes were damp'd,
     And the poor little cutter quickly swamp'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Nine souls more went in her: the long-boat still
       Kept above water, with an oar for mast,
     Two blankets stitch'd together, answering ill
       Instead of sail, were to the oar made fast:
     Though every wave roll'd menacing to fill,
       And present peril all before surpass'd,
     They grieved for those who perish'd with the cutter,
     And also for the biscuit-casks and butter.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The sun rose red and fiery, a sure sign
       Of the continuance of the gale: to run
     Before the sea until it should grow fine,
       Was all that for the present could be done:
     A few tea-spoonfuls of their rum and wine
       Were served out to the people, who begun
     To faint, and damaged bread wet through the bags,
     And most of them had little clothes but rags.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They counted thirty, crowded in a space
       Which left scarce room for motion or exertion;
     They did their best to modify their case,
       One half sate up, though numb'd with the immersion,
     While t'other half were laid down in their place
       At watch and watch; thus, shivering like the tertian
     Ague in its cold fit, they fill'd their boat,
     With nothing but the sky for a great coat.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is very certain the desire of life
       Prolongs it: this is obvious to physicians,
     When patients, neither plagued with friends nor wife,
       Survive through very desperate conditions,
     Because they still can hope, nor shines the knife
       Nor shears of Atropos before their visions:
     Despair of all recovery spoils longevity,
     And makes men miseries miseries of alarming brevity.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is said that persons living on annuities
       Are longer lived than others,--God knows why,
     Unless to plague the grantors,--yet so true it is,
       That some, I really think, do never die;
     Of any creditors the worst a Jew it is,
       And that 's their mode of furnishing supply:
     In my young days they lent me cash that way,
     Which I found very troublesome to pay.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is thus with people in an open boat,
       They live upon the love of life, and bear
     More than can be believed, or even thought,
       And stand like rocks the tempest's wear and tear;
     And hardship still has been the sailor's lot,
       Since Noah's ark went cruising here and there;
     She had a curious crew as well as cargo,
     Like the first old Greek privateer, the Argo.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But man is a carnivorous production,
       And must have meals, at least one meal a day;
     He cannot live, like woodcocks, upon suction,
       But, like the shark and tiger, must have prey;
     Although his anatomical construction
       Bears vegetables, in a grumbling way,
     Your labouring people think beyond all question,
     Beef, veal, and mutton, better for digestion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And thus it was with this our hapless crew;
       For on the third day there came on a calm,
     And though at first their strength it might renew,
       And lying on their weariness like balm,
     Lull'd them like turtles sleeping on the blue
       Of ocean, when they woke they felt a qualm,
     And fell all ravenously on their provision,
     Instead of hoarding it with due precision.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The consequence was easily foreseen--
       They ate up all they had, and drank their wine,
     In spite of all remonstrances, and then
       On what, in fact, next day were they to dine?
     They hoped the wind would rise, these foolish men!
       And carry them to shore; these hopes were fine,
     But as they had but one oar, and that brittle,
     It would have been more wise to save their victual.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The fourth day came, but not a breath of air,
       And Ocean slumber'd like an unwean'd child:
     The fifth day, and their boat lay floating there,
       The sea and sky were blue, and clear, and mild--
     With their one oar (I wish they had had a pair)
       What could they do? and hunger's rage grew wild:
     So Juan's spaniel, spite of his entreating,
     Was kill'd and portion'd out for present eating.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     On the sixth day they fed upon his hide,
       And Juan, who had still refused, because
     The creature was his father's dog that died,
       Now feeling all the vulture in his jaws,
     With some remorse received (though first denied)
       As a great favour one of the fore-paws,
     Which he divided with Pedrillo, who
     Devour'd it, longing for the other too.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The seventh day, and no wind--the burning sun
       Blister'd and scorch'd, and, stagnant on the sea,
     They lay like carcasses; and hope was none,
       Save in the breeze that came not; savagely
     They glared upon each other--all was done,
       Water, and wine, and food,--and you might see
     The longings of the cannibal arise
     (Although they spoke not) in their wolfish eyes.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     At length one whisper'd his companion, who
       Whisper'd another, and thus it went round,
     And then into a hoarser murmur grew,
       An ominous, and wild, and desperate sound;
     And when his comrade's thought each sufferer knew,
       'T was but his own, suppress'd till now, he found:
     And out they spoke of lots for flesh and blood,
     And who should die to be his fellow's food.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But ere they came to this, they that day shared
       Some leathern caps, and what remain'd of shoes;
     And then they look'd around them and despair'd,
       And none to be the sacrifice would choose;
     At length the lots were torn up, and prepared,
       But of materials that much shock the Muse--
     Having no paper, for the want of better,
     They took by force from Juan Julia's letter.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The lots were made, and mark'd, and mix'd, and handed,
       In silent horror, and their distribution
     Lull'd even the savage hunger which demanded,
       Like the Promethean vulture, this pollution;
     None in particular had sought or plann'd it,
       'T was nature gnaw'd them to this resolution,
     By which none were permitted to be neuter--
     And the lot fell on Juan's luckless tutor.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He but requested to be bled to death:
       The surgeon had his instruments, and bled
     Pedrillo, and so gently ebb'd his breath,
       You hardly could perceive when he was dead.
     He died as born, a Catholic in faith,
       Like most in the belief in which they 're bred,
     And first a little crucifix he kiss'd,
     And then held out his jugular and wrist.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The surgeon, as there was no other fee,
       Had his first choice of morsels for his pains;
     But being thirstiest at the moment, he
       Preferr'd a draught from the fast-flowing veins:
     Part was divided, part thrown in the sea,
       And such things as the entrails and the brains
     Regaled two sharks, who follow'd o'er the billow--
     The sailors ate the rest of poor Pedrillo.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The sailors ate him, all save three or four,
       Who were not quite so fond of animal food;
     To these was added Juan, who, before
       Refusing his own spaniel, hardly could
     Feel now his appetite increased much more;
       'T was not to be expected that he should,
     Even in extremity of their disaster,
     Dine with them on his pastor and his master.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was better that he did not; for, in fact,
       The consequence was awful in the extreme;
     For they, who were most ravenous in the act,
       Went raging mad--Lord! how they did blaspheme!
     And foam and roll, with strange convulsions rack'd,
       Drinking salt water like a mountain-stream,
     Tearing, and grinning, howling, screeching, swearing,
     And, with hyaena-laughter, died despairing.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Their numbers were much thinn'd by this infliction,
       And all the rest were thin enough, Heaven knows;
     And some of them had lost their recollection,
       Happier than they who still perceived their woes;
     But others ponder'd on a new dissection,
       As if not warn'd sufficiently by those
     Who had already perish'd, suffering madly,
     For having used their appetites so sadly.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And next they thought upon the master's mate,
       As fattest; but he saved himself, because,
     Besides being much averse from such a fate,
       There were some other reasons: the first was,
     He had been rather indisposed of late;
       And that which chiefly proved his saving clause
     Was a small present made to him at Cadiz,
     By general subscription of the ladies.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Of poor Pedrillo something still remain'd,
       But was used sparingly,--some were afraid,
     And others still their appetites constrain'd,
       Or but at times a little supper made;
     All except Juan, who throughout abstain'd,
       Chewing a piece of bamboo and some lead:
     At length they caught two boobies and a noddy,
     And then they left off eating the dead body.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And if Pedrillo's fate should shocking be,
       Remember Ugolino condescends
     To eat the head of his arch-enemy
       The moment after he politely ends
     His tale: if foes be food in hell, at sea
       'T is surely fair to dine upon our friends,
     When shipwreck's short allowance grows too scanty,
     Without being much more horrible than Dante.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And the same night there fell a shower of rain,
       For which their mouths gaped, like the cracks of earth
     When dried to summer dust; till taught by pain
       Men really know not what good water 's worth;
     If you had been in Turkey or in Spain,
       Or with a famish'd boat's-crew had your berth,
     Or in the desert heard the camel's bell,
     You 'd wish yourself where Truth is--in a well.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It pour'd down torrents, but they were no richer
       Until they found a ragged piece of sheet,
     Which served them as a sort of spongy pitcher,
       And when they deem'd its moisture was complete
     They wrung it out, and though a thirsty ditcher
       Might not have thought the scanty draught so sweet
     As a full pot of porter, to their thinking
     They ne'er till now had known the joys of drinking.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And their baked lips, with many a bloody crack,
       Suck'd in the moisture, which like nectar stream'd;
     Their throats were ovens, their swoln tongues were black,
       As the rich man's in hell, who vainly scream'd
     To beg the beggar, who could not rain back
       A drop of dew, when every drop had seem'd
     To taste of heaven--If this be true, indeed
     Some Christians have a comfortable creed.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There were two fathers in this ghastly crew,
       And with them their two sons, of whom the one
     Was more robust and hardy to the view,
       But he died early; and when he was gone,
     His nearest messmate told his sire, who threw
       One glance at him, and said, 'Heaven's will be done!
     I can do nothing,' and he saw him thrown
     Into the deep without a tear or groan.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The other father had a weaklier child,
       Of a soft cheek and aspect delicate;
     But the boy bore up long, and with a mild
       And patient spirit held aloof his fate;
     Little he said, and now and then he smiled,
       As if to win a part from off the weight
     He saw increasing on his father's heart,
     With the deep deadly thought that they must part.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And o'er him bent his sire, and never raised
       His eyes from off his face, but wiped the foam
     From his pale lips, and ever on him gazed,
       And when the wish'd-for shower at length was come,
     And the boy's eyes, which the dull film half glazed,
       Brighten'd, and for a moment seem'd to roam,
     He squeezed from out a rag some drops of rain
     Into his dying child's mouth--but in vain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The boy expired--the father held the clay,
       And look'd upon it long, and when at last
     Death left no doubt, and the dead burthen lay
       Stiff on his heart, and pulse and hope were past,
     He watch'd it wistfully, until away
       'T was borne by the rude wave wherein 't was cast;
     Then he himself sunk down all dumb and shivering,
     And gave no sign of life, save his limbs quivering.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now overhead a rainbow, bursting through
       The scattering clouds, shone, spanning the dark sea,
     Resting its bright base on the quivering blue;
       And all within its arch appear'd to be
     Clearer than that without, and its wide hue
       Wax'd broad and waving, like a banner free,
     Then changed like to a bow that 's bent, and then
     Forsook the dim eyes of these shipwreck'd men.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It changed, of course; a heavenly chameleon,
       The airy child of vapour and the sun,
     Brought forth in purple, cradled in vermilion,
       Baptized in molten gold, and swathed in dun,
     Glittering like crescents o'er a Turk's pavilion,
       And blending every colour into one,
     Just like a black eye in a recent scuffle
     (For sometimes we must box without the muffle).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Our shipwreck'd seamen thought it a good omen--
       It is as well to think so, now and then;
     'T was an old custom of the Greek and Roman,
       And may become of great advantage when
     Folks are discouraged; and most surely no men
       Had greater need to nerve themselves again
     Than these, and so this rainbow look'd like hope--
     Quite a celestial kaleidoscope.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     About this time a beautiful white bird,
       Webfooted, not unlike a dove in size
     And plumage (probably it might have err'd
       Upon its course), pass'd oft before their eyes,
     And tried to perch, although it saw and heard
       The men within the boat, and in this guise
     It came and went, and flutter'd round them till
     Night fell: this seem'd a better omen still.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But in this case I also must remark,
       'T was well this bird of promise did not perch,
     Because the tackle of our shatter'd bark
       Was not so safe for roosting as a church;
     And had it been the dove from Noah's ark,
       Returning there from her successful search,
     Which in their way that moment chanced to fall,
     They would have eat her, olive-branch and all.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     With twilight it again came on to blow,
       But not with violence; the stars shone out,
     The boat made way; yet now they were so low,
       They knew not where nor what they were about;
     Some fancied they saw land, and some said 'No!'
       The frequent fog-banks gave them cause to doubt--
     Some swore that they heard breakers, others guns,
     And all mistook about the latter once.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     As morning broke, the light wind died away,
       When he who had the watch sung out and swore,
     If 't was not land that rose with the sun's ray,
       He wish'd that land he never might see more;
     And the rest rubb'd their eyes and saw a bay,
       Or thought they saw, and shaped their course for shore;
     For shore it was, and gradually grew
     Distinct, and high, and palpable to view.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And then of these some part burst into tears,
       And others, looking with a stupid stare,
     Could not yet separate their hopes from fears,
       And seem'd as if they had no further care;
     While a few pray'd (the first time for some years)--
       And at the bottom of the boat three were
     Asleep: they shook them by the hand and head,
     And tried to awaken them, but found them dead.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The day before, fast sleeping on the water,
       They found a turtle of the hawk's-bill kind,
     And by good fortune, gliding softly, caught her,
       Which yielded a day's life, and to their mind
     Proved even still a more nutritious matter,
       Because it left encouragement behind:
     They thought that in such perils, more than chance
     Had sent them this for their deliverance.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The land appear'd a high and rocky coast,
       And higher grew the mountains as they drew,
     Set by a current, toward it: they were lost
       In various conjectures, for none knew
     To what part of the earth they had been tost,
       So changeable had been the winds that blew;
     Some thought it was Mount AEtna, some the highlands,
     Of Candia, Cyprus, Rhodes, or other islands.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Meantime the current, with a rising gale,
       Still set them onwards to the welcome shore,
     Like Charon's bark of spectres, dull and pale:
       Their living freight was now reduced to four,
     And three dead, whom their strength could not avail
       To heave into the deep with those before,
     Though the two sharks still follow'd them, and dash'd
     The spray into their faces as they splash'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Famine, despair, cold, thirst, and heat, had done
       Their work on them by turns, and thinn'd them to
     Such things a mother had not known her son
       Amidst the skeletons of that gaunt crew;
     By night chill'd, by day scorch'd, thus one by one
       They perish'd, until wither'd to these few,
     But chiefly by a species of self-slaughter,
     In washing down Pedrillo with salt water.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     As they drew nigh the land, which now was seen
       Unequal in its aspect here and there,
     They felt the freshness of its growing green,
       That waved in forest-tops, and smooth'd the air,
     And fell upon their glazed eyes like a screen
       From glistening waves, and skies so hot and bare--
     Lovely seem'd any object that should sweep
     Away the vast, salt, dread, eternal deep.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The shore look'd wild, without a trace of man,
       And girt by formidable waves; but they
     Were mad for land, and thus their course they ran,
       Though right ahead the roaring breakers lay:
     A reef between them also now began
       To show its boiling surf and bounding spray,
     But finding no place for their landing better,
     They ran the boat for shore,--and overset her.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But in his native stream, the Guadalquivir,
       Juan to lave his youthful limbs was wont;
     And having learnt to swim in that sweet river,
       Had often turn'd the art to some account:
     A better swimmer you could scarce see ever,
       He could, perhaps, have pass'd the Hellespont,
     As once (a feat on which ourselves we prided)
     Leander, Mr. Ekenhead, and I did.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     So here, though faint, emaciated, and stark,
       He buoy'd his boyish limbs, and strove to ply
     With the quick wave, and gain, ere it was dark,
       The beach which lay before him, high and dry:
     The greatest danger here was from a shark,
       That carried off his neighbour by the thigh;
     As for the other two, they could not swim,
     So nobody arrived on shore but him.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Nor yet had he arrived but for the oar,
       Which, providentially for him, was wash'd
     Just as his feeble arms could strike no more,
       And the hard wave o'erwhelm'd him as 't was dash'd
     Within his grasp; he clung to it, and sore
       The waters beat while he thereto was lash'd;
     At last, with swimming, wading, scrambling, he
     Roll'd on the beach, half-senseless, from the sea:

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There, breathless, with his digging nails he clung
       Fast to the sand, lest the returning wave,
     From whose reluctant roar his life he wrung,
       Should suck him back to her insatiate grave:
     And there he lay, full length, where he was flung,
       Before the entrance of a cliff-worn cave,
     With just enough of life to feel its pain,
     And deem that it was saved, perhaps in vain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     With slow and staggering effort he arose,
       But sunk again upon his bleeding knee
     And quivering hand; and then he look'd for those
       Who long had been his mates upon the sea;
     But none of them appear'd to share his woes,
       Save one, a corpse, from out the famish'd three,
     Who died two days before, and now had found
     An unknown barren beach for burial ground.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And as he gazed, his dizzy brain spun fast,
       And down he sunk; and as he sunk, the sand
     Swam round and round, and all his senses pass'd:
       He fell upon his side, and his stretch'd hand
     Droop'd dripping on the oar (their jurymast),
       And, like a wither'd lily, on the land
     His slender frame and pallid aspect lay,
     As fair a thing as e'er was form'd of clay.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     How long in his damp trance young Juan lay
       He knew not, for the earth was gone for him,
     And Time had nothing more of night nor day
       For his congealing blood, and senses dim;
     And how this heavy faintness pass'd away
       He knew not, till each painful pulse and limb,
     And tingling vein, seem'd throbbing back to life,
     For Death, though vanquish'd, still retired with strife.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     His eyes he open'd, shut, again unclosed,
       For all was doubt and dizziness; he thought
     He still was in the boat and had but dozed,
       And felt again with his despair o'erwrought,
     And wish'd it death in which he had reposed;
       And then once more his feelings back were brought,
     And slowly by his swimming eyes was seen
     A lovely female face of seventeen.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T was bending dose o'er his, and the small mouth
       Seem'd almost prying into his for breath;
     And chafing him, the soft warm hand of youth
       Recall'd his answering spirits back from death;
     And, bathing his chill temples, tried to soothe
       Each pulse to animation, till beneath
     Its gentle touch and trembling care, a sigh
     To these kind efforts made a low reply.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then was the cordial pour'd, and mantle flung
       Around his scarce-clad limbs; and the fair arm
     Raised higher the faint head which o'er it hung;
       And her transparent cheek, all pure and warm,
     Pillow'd his death-like forehead; then she wrung
       His dewy curls, long drench'd by every storm;
     And watch'd with eagerness each throb that drew
     A sigh from his heaved bosom--and hers, too.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And lifting him with care into the cave,
       The gentle girl and her attendant,--one
     Young, yet her elder, and of brow less grave,
       And more robust of figure,--then begun
     To kindle fire, and as the new flames gave
       Light to the rocks that roof'd them, which the sun
     Had never seen, the maid, or whatsoe'er
     She was, appear'd distinct, and tall, and fair.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her brow was overhung with coins of gold,
       That sparkled o'er the auburn of her hair--
     Her clustering hair, whose longer locks were roll'd
       In braids behind; and though her stature were
     Even of the highest for a female mould,
       They nearly reach'd her heel; and in her air
     There was a something which bespoke command,
     As one who was a lady in the land.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her hair, I said, was auburn; but her eyes
       Were black as death, their lashes the same hue,
     Of downcast length, in whose silk shadow lies
       Deepest attraction; for when to the view
     Forth from its raven fringe the full glance flies,
       Ne'er with such force the swiftest arrow flew;
     'T is as the snake late coil'd, who pours his length,
     And hurls at once his venom and his strength.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her brow was white and low, her cheek's pure dye
       Like twilight rosy still with the set sun;
     Short upper lip--sweet lips! that make us sigh
       Ever to have seen such; for she was one
     Fit for the model of a statuary
       (A race of mere impostors, when all 's done--
     I 've seen much finer women, ripe and real,
     Than all the nonsense of their stone ideal).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I 'll tell you why I say so, for 't is just
       One should not rail without a decent cause:
     There was an Irish lady, to whose bust
       I ne'er saw justice done, and yet she was
     A frequent model; and if e'er she must
       Yield to stern Time and Nature's wrinkling laws,
     They will destroy a face which mortal thought
     Ne'er compass'd, nor less mortal chisel wrought.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And such was she, the lady of the cave:
       Her dress was very different from the Spanish,
     Simpler, and yet of colours not so grave;
       For, as you know, the Spanish women banish
     Bright hues when out of doors, and yet, while wave
       Around them (what I hope will never vanish)
     The basquina and the mantilla, they
     Seem at the same time mystical and gay.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But with our damsel this was not the case:
       Her dress was many-colour'd, finely spun;
     Her locks curl'd negligently round her face,
       But through them gold and gems profusely shone:
     Her girdle sparkled, and the richest lace
       Flow'd in her veil, and many a precious stone
     Flash'd on her little hand; but, what was shocking,
     Her small snow feet had slippers, but no stocking.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The other female's dress was not unlike,
       But of inferior materials: she
     Had not so many ornaments to strike,
       Her hair had silver only, bound to be
     Her dowry; and her veil, in form alike,
       Was coarser; and her air, though firm, less free;
     Her hair was thicker, but less long; her eyes
     As black, but quicker, and of smaller size.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And these two tended him, and cheer'd him both
       With food and raiment, and those soft attentions,
     Which are (as I must own) of female growth,
       And have ten thousand delicate inventions:
     They made a most superior mess of broth,
       A thing which poesy but seldom mentions,
     But the best dish that e'er was cook'd since Homer's
     Achilles ordered dinner for new comers.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I 'll tell you who they were, this female pair,
       Lest they should seem princesses in disguise;
     Besides, I hate all mystery, and that air
       Of clap-trap which your recent poets prize;
     And so, in short, the girls they really were
       They shall appear before your curious eyes,
     Mistress and maid; the first was only daughter
     Of an old man who lived upon the water.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A fisherman he had been in his youth,
       And still a sort of fisherman was he;
     But other speculations were, in sooth,
       Added to his connection with the sea,
     Perhaps not so respectable, in truth:
       A little smuggling, and some piracy,
     Left him, at last, the sole of many masters
     Of an ill-gotten million of piastres.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A fisher, therefore, was he,--though of men,
       Like Peter the Apostle,--and he fish'd
     For wandering merchant-vessels, now and then,
       And sometimes caught as many as he wish'd;
     The cargoes he confiscated, and gain
       He sought in the slave-market too, and dish'd
     Full many a morsel for that Turkish trade,
     By which, no doubt, a good deal may be made.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He was a Greek, and on his isle had built
       (One of the wild and smaller Cyclades)
     A very handsome house from out his guilt,
       And there he lived exceedingly at ease;
     Heaven knows what cash he got or blood he spilt,
       A sad old fellow was he, if you please;
     But this I know, it was a spacious building,
     Full of barbaric carving, paint, and gilding.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He had an only daughter, call'd Haidee,
       The greatest heiress of the Eastern Isles;
     Besides, so very beautiful was she,
       Her dowry was as nothing to her smiles:
     Still in her teens, and like a lovely tree
       She grew to womanhood, and between whiles
     Rejected several suitors, just to learn
     How to accept a better in his turn.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And walking out upon the beach, below
       The cliff, towards sunset, on that day she found,
     Insensible,--not dead, but nearly so,--
       Don Juan, almost famish'd, and half drown'd;
     But being naked, she was shock'd, you know,
       Yet deem'd herself in common pity bound,
     As far as in her lay, 'to take him in,
     A stranger' dying, with so white a skin.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But taking him into her father's house
       Was not exactly the best way to save,
     But like conveying to the cat the mouse,
       Or people in a trance into their grave;
     Because the good old man had so much 'nous,'
       Unlike the honest Arab thieves so brave,
     He would have hospitably cured the stranger,
     And sold him instantly when out of danger.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And therefore, with her maid, she thought it best
       (A virgin always on her maid relies)
     To place him in the cave for present rest:
       And when, at last, he open'd his black eyes,
     Their charity increased about their guest;
       And their compassion grew to such a size,
     It open'd half the turnpike-gates to heaven
     (St. Paul says, 't is the toll which must be given).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They made a fire,--but such a fire as they
       Upon the moment could contrive with such
     Materials as were cast up round the bay,--
       Some broken planks, and oars, that to the touch
     Were nearly tinder, since so long they lay
       A mast was almost crumbled to a crutch;
     But, by God's grace, here wrecks were in such plenty,
     That there was fuel to have furnish'd twenty.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He had a bed of furs, and a pelisse,
       For Haidee stripped her sables off to make
     His couch; and, that he might be more at ease,
       And warm, in case by chance he should awake,
     They also gave a petticoat apiece,
       She and her maid--and promised by daybreak
     To pay him a fresh visit, with a dish
     For breakfast, of eggs, coffee, bread, and fish.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And thus they left him to his lone repose:
       Juan slept like a top, or like the dead,
     Who sleep at last, perhaps (God only knows),
       Just for the present; and in his lull'd head
     Not even a vision of his former woes
       Throbb'd in accursed dreams, which sometimes spread
     Unwelcome visions of our former years,
     Till the eye, cheated, opens thick with tears.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Young Juan slept all dreamless:--but the maid,
       Who smooth'd his pillow, as she left the den
     Look'd back upon him, and a moment stay'd,
       And turn'd, believing that he call'd again.
     He slumber'd; yet she thought, at least she said
       (The heart will slip, even as the tongue and pen),
     He had pronounced her name--but she forgot
     That at this moment Juan knew it not.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And pensive to her father's house she went,
       Enjoining silence strict to Zoe, who
     Better than her knew what, in fact, she meant,
       She being wiser by a year or two:
     A year or two 's an age when rightly spent,
       And Zoe spent hers, as most women do,
     In gaining all that useful sort of knowledge
     Which is acquired in Nature's good old college.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The morn broke, and found Juan slumbering still
       Fast in his cave, and nothing clash'd upon
     His rest; the rushing of the neighbouring rill,
       And the young beams of the excluded sun,
     Troubled him not, and he might sleep his fill;
       And need he had of slumber yet, for none
     Had suffer'd more--his hardships were comparative
     To those related in my grand-dad's 'Narrative.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Not so Haidee: she sadly toss'd and tumbled,
       And started from her sleep, and, turning o'er
     Dream'd of a thousand wrecks, o'er which she stumbled,
       And handsome corpses strew'd upon the shore;
     And woke her maid so early that she grumbled,
       And call'd her father's old slaves up, who swore
     In several oaths--Armenian, Turk, and Greek--
     They knew not what to think of such a freak.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But up she got, and up she made them get,
       With some pretence about the sun, that makes
     Sweet skies just when he rises, or is set;
       And 't is, no doubt, a sight to see when breaks
     Bright Phoebus, while the mountains still are wet
       With mist, and every bird with him awakes,
     And night is flung off like a mourning suit
     Worn for a husband,--or some other brute.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I say, the sun is a most glorious sight,
       I 've seen him rise full oft, indeed of late
     I have sat up on purpose all the night,
       Which hastens, as physicians say, one's fate;
     And so all ye, who would be in the right
       In health and purse, begin your day to date
     From daybreak, and when coffin'd at fourscore,
     Engrave upon the plate, you rose at four.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Haidee met the morning face to face;
       Her own was freshest, though a feverish flush
     Had dyed it with the headlong blood, whose race
       From heart to cheek is curb'd into a blush,
     Like to a torrent which a mountain's base,
       That overpowers some Alpine river's rush,
     Checks to a lake, whose waves in circles spread;
     Or the Red Sea--but the sea is not red.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And down the cliff the island virgin came,
       And near the cave her quick light footsteps drew,
     While the sun smiled on her with his first flame,
       And young Aurora kiss'd her lips with dew,
     Taking her for a sister; just the same
       Mistake you would have made on seeing the two,
     Although the mortal, quite as fresh and fair,
     Had all the advantage, too, of not being air.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And when into the cavern Haidee stepp'd
       All timidly, yet rapidly, she saw
     That like an infant Juan sweetly slept;
       And then she stopp'd, and stood as if in awe
     (For sleep is awful), and on tiptoe crept
       And wrapt him closer, lest the air, too raw,
     Should reach his blood, then o'er him still as death
     Bent with hush'd lips, that drank his scarce-drawn breath.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And thus like to an angel o'er the dying
       Who die in righteousness, she lean'd; and there
     All tranquilly the shipwreck'd boy was lying,
       As o'er him the calm and stirless air:
     But Zoe the meantime some eggs was frying,
       Since, after all, no doubt the youthful pair
     Must breakfast--and betimes, lest they should ask it,
     She drew out her provision from the basket.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She knew that the best feelings must have victual,
       And that a shipwreck'd youth would hungry be;
     Besides, being less in love, she yawn'd a little,
       And felt her veins chill'd by the neighbouring sea;
     And so, she cook'd their breakfast to a tittle;
       I can't say that she gave them any tea,
     But there were eggs, fruit, coffee, bread, fish, honey,
     With Scio wine,--and all for love, not money.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Zoe, when the eggs were ready, and
       The coffee made, would fain have waken'd Juan;
     But Haidee stopp'd her with her quick small hand,
       And without word, a sign her finger drew on
     Her lip, which Zoe needs must understand;
       And, the first breakfast spoilt, prepared a new one,
     Because her mistress would not let her break
     That sleep which seem'd as it would ne'er awake.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For still he lay, and on his thin worn cheek
       A purple hectic play'd like dying day
     On the snow-tops of distant hills; the streak
       Of sufferance yet upon his forehead lay,
     Where the blue veins look'd shadowy, shrunk, and weak;
       And his black curls were dewy with the spray,
     Which weigh'd upon them yet, all damp and salt,
     Mix'd with the stony vapours of the vault.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And she bent o'er him, and he lay beneath,
       Hush'd as the babe upon its mother's breast,
     Droop'd as the willow when no winds can breathe,
       Lull'd like the depth of ocean when at rest,
     Fair as the crowning rose of the whole wreath,
       Soft as the callow cygnet in its nest;
     In short, he was a very pretty fellow,
     Although his woes had turn'd him rather yellow.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He woke and gazed, and would have slept again,
       But the fair face which met his eyes forbade
     Those eyes to close, though weariness and pain
       Had further sleep a further pleasure made;
     For woman's face was never form'd in vain
       For Juan, so that even when he pray'd
     He turn'd from grisly saints, and martyrs hairy,
     To the sweet portraits of the Virgin Mary.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And thus upon his elbow he arose,
       And look'd upon the lady, in whose cheek
     The pale contended with the purple rose,
       As with an effort she began to speak;
     Her eyes were eloquent, her words would pose,
       Although she told him, in good modern Greek,
     With an Ionian accent, low and sweet,
     That he was faint, and must not talk, but eat.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now Juan could not understand a word,
       Being no Grecian; but he had an ear,
     And her voice was the warble of a bird,
       So soft, so sweet, so delicately clear,
     That finer, simpler music ne'er was heard;
       The sort of sound we echo with a tear,
     Without knowing why--an overpowering tone,
     Whence Melody descends as from a throne.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Juan gazed as one who is awoke
       By a distant organ, doubting if he be
     Not yet a dreamer, till the spell is broke
       By the watchman, or some such reality,
     Or by one's early valet's cursed knock;
       At least it is a heavy sound to me,
     Who like a morning slumber--for the night
     Shows stars and women in a better light.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Juan, too, was help'd out from his dream,
       Or sleep, or whatso'er it was, by feeling
     A most prodigious appetite: the steam
       Of Zoe's cookery no doubt was stealing
     Upon his senses, and the kindling beam
       Of the new fire, which Zoe kept up, kneeling
     To stir her viands, made him quite awake
     And long for food, but chiefly a beef-steak.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But beef is rare within these oxless isles;
       Goat's flesh there is, no doubt, and kid, and mutton;
     And, when a holiday upon them smiles,
       A joint upon their barbarous spits they put on:
     But this occurs but seldom, between whiles,
       For some of these are rocks with scarce a hut on;
     Others are fair and fertile, among which
     This, though not large, was one of the most rich.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I say that beef is rare, and can't help thinking
       That the old fable of the Minotaur--
     From which our modern morals rightly shrinking
       Condemn the royal lady's taste who wore
     A cow's shape for a mask--was only (sinking
       The allegory) a mere type, no more,
     That Pasiphae promoted breeding cattle,
     To make the Cretans bloodier in battle.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For we all know that English people are
       Fed upon beef--I won't say much of beer,
     Because 't is liquor only, and being far
       From this my subject, has no business here;
     We know, too, they very fond of war,
       A pleasure--like all pleasures--rather dear;
     So were the Cretans--from which I infer
     That beef and battles both were owing to her.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But to resume. The languid Juan raised
       His head upon his elbow, and he saw
     A sight on which he had not lately gazed,
       As all his latter meals had been quite raw,
     Three or four things, for which the Lord he praised,
       And, feeling still the famish'd vulture gnaw,
     He fell upon whate'er was offer'd, like
     A priest, a shark, an alderman, or pike.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He ate, and he was well supplied: and she,
       Who watch'd him like a mother, would have fed
     Him past all bounds, because she smiled to see
       Such appetite in one she had deem'd dead;
     But Zoe, being older than Haidee,
       Knew (by tradition, for she ne'er had read)
     That famish'd people must be slowly nurst,
     And fed by spoonfuls, else they always burst.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And so she took the liberty to state,
       Rather by deeds than words, because the case
     Was urgent, that the gentleman, whose fate
       Had made her mistress quit her bed to trace
     The sea-shore at this hour, must leave his plate,
       Unless he wish'd to die upon the place--
     She snatch'd it, and refused another morsel,
     Saying, he had gorged enough to make a horse ill.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Next they--he being naked, save a tatter'd
       Pair of scarce decent trowsers--went to work,
     And in the fire his recent rags they scatter'd,
       And dress'd him, for the present, like a Turk,
     Or Greek--that is, although it not much matter'd,
       Omitting turban, slippers, pistols, dirk,--
     They furnish'd him, entire, except some stitches,
     With a clean shirt, and very spacious breeches.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And then fair Haidee tried her tongue at speaking,
       But not a word could Juan comprehend,
     Although he listen'd so that the young Greek in
       Her earnestness would ne'er have made an end;
     And, as he interrupted not, went eking
       Her speech out to her protege and friend,
     Till pausing at the last her breath to take,
     She saw he did not understand Romaic.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And then she had recourse to nods, and signs,
       And smiles, and sparkles of the speaking eye,
     And read (the only book she could) the lines
       Of his fair face, and found, by sympathy,
     The answer eloquent, where soul shines
       And darts in one quick glance a long reply;
     And thus in every look she saw exprest
     A world of words, and things at which she guess'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And now, by dint of fingers and of eyes,
       And words repeated after her, he took
     A lesson in her tongue; but by surmise,
       No doubt, less of her language than her look:
     As he who studies fervently the skies
       Turns oftener to the stars than to his book,
     Thus Juan learn'd his alpha beta better
     From Haidee's glance than any graven letter.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is pleasing to be school'd in a strange tongue
       By female lips and eyes--that is, I mean,
     When both the teacher and the taught are young,
       As was the case, at least, where I have been;
     They smile so when one 's right, and when one 's wrong
       They smile still more, and then there intervene
     Pressure of hands, perhaps even a chaste kiss;--
     I learn'd the little that I know by this:

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     That is, some words of Spanish, Turk, and Greek,
       Italian not at all, having no teachers;
     Much English I cannot pretend to speak,
       Learning that language chiefly from its preachers,
     Barrow, South, Tillotson, whom every week
       I study, also Blair, the highest reachers
     Of eloquence in piety and prose--
     I hate your poets, so read none of those.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     As for the ladies, I have nought to say,
       A wanderer from the British world of fashion,
     Where I, like other 'dogs, have had my day,'
       Like other men, too, may have had my passion--
     But that, like other things, has pass'd away,
       And all her fools whom I could lay the lash on:
     Foes, friends, men, women, now are nought to me
     But dreams of what has been, no more to be.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Return we to Don Juan. He begun
       To hear new words, and to repeat them; but
     Some feelings, universal as the sun,
       Were such as could not in his breast be shut
     More than within the bosom of a nun:
       He was in love,--as you would be, no doubt,
     With a young benefactress,--so was she,
     Just in the way we very often see.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And every day by daybreak--rather early
       For Juan, who was somewhat fond of rest--
     She came into the cave, but it was merely
       To see her bird reposing in his nest;
     And she would softly stir his locks so curly,
       Without disturbing her yet slumbering guest,
     Breathing all gently o'er his cheek and mouth,
     As o'er a bed of roses the sweet south.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And every morn his colour freshlier came,
       And every day help'd on his convalescence;
     'T was well, because health in the human frame
       Is pleasant, besides being true love's essence,
     For health and idleness to passion's flame
       Are oil and gunpowder; and some good lessons
     Are also learnt from Ceres and from Bacchus,
     Without whom Venus will not long attack us.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     While Venus fills the heart (without heart really
       Love, though good always, is not quite so good),
     Ceres presents a plate of vermicelli,--
       For love must be sustain'd like flesh and blood,--
     While Bacchus pours out wine, or hands a jelly:
       Eggs, oysters, too, are amatory food;
     But who is their purveyor from above
     Heaven knows,--it may be Neptune, Pan, or Jove.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     When Juan woke he found some good things ready,
       A bath, a breakfast, and the finest eyes
     That ever made a youthful heart less steady,
       Besides her maid's as pretty for their size;
     But I have spoken of all this already--
       And repetition 's tiresome and unwise,--
     Well--Juan, after bathing in the sea,
     Came always back to coffee and Haidee.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Both were so young, and one so innocent,
       That bathing pass'd for nothing; Juan seem'd
     To her, as 'twere, the kind of being sent,
       Of whom these two years she had nightly dream'd,
     A something to be loved, a creature meant
       To be her happiness, and whom she deem'd
     To render happy; all who joy would win
     Must share it,--Happiness was born a twin.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It was such pleasure to behold him, such
       Enlargement of existence to partake
     Nature with him, to thrill beneath his touch,
       To watch him slumbering, and to see him wake:
     To live with him forever were too much;
       But then the thought of parting made her quake;
     He was her own, her ocean-treasure, cast
     Like a rich wreck--her first love, and her last.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And thus a moon roll'd on, and fair Haidee
       Paid daily visits to her boy, and took
     Such plentiful precautions, that still he
       Remain'd unknown within his craggy nook;
     At last her father's prows put out to sea
       For certain merchantmen upon the look,
     Not as of yore to carry off an Io,
     But three Ragusan vessels, bound for Scio.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then came her freedom, for she had no mother,
       So that, her father being at sea, she was
     Free as a married woman, or such other
       Female, as where she likes may freely pass,
     Without even the incumbrance of a brother,
       The freest she that ever gazed on glass;
     I speak of Christian lands in this comparison,
     Where wives, at least, are seldom kept in garrison.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now she prolong'd her visits and her talk
       (For they must talk), and he had learnt to say
     So much as to propose to take a walk,--
       For little had he wander'd since the day
     On which, like a young flower snapp'd from the stalk,
       Drooping and dewy on the beach he lay,--
     And thus they walk'd out in the afternoon,
     And saw the sun set opposite the moon.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It was a wild and breaker-beaten coast,
       With cliffs above, and a broad sandy shore,
     Guarded by shoals and rocks as by an host,
       With here and there a creek, whose aspect wore
     A better welcome to the tempest-tost;
       And rarely ceased the haughty billow's roar,
     Save on the dead long summer days, which make
     The outstretch'd ocean glitter like a lake.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And the small ripple spilt upon the beach
       Scarcely o'erpass'd the cream of your champagne,
     When o'er the brim the sparkling bumpers reach,
       That spring-dew of the spirit! the heart's rain!
     Few things surpass old wine; and they may preach
       Who please,--the more because they preach in vain,--
     Let us have wine and women, mirth and laughter,
     Sermons and soda-water the day after.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Man, being reasonable, must get drunk;
       The best of life is but intoxication:
     Glory, the grape, love, gold, in these are sunk
       The hopes of all men, and of every nation;
     Without their sap, how branchless were the trunk
       Of life's strange tree, so fruitful on occasion:
     But to return,--Get very drunk; and when
     You wake with headache, you shall see what then.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Ring for your valet--bid him quickly bring
       Some hock and soda-water, then you 'll know
     A pleasure worthy Xerxes the great king;
       For not the bless'd sherbet, sublimed with snow,
     Nor the first sparkle of the desert-spring,
       Nor Burgundy in all its sunset glow,
     After long travel, ennui, love, or slaughter,
     Vie with that draught of hock and soda-water.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The coast--I think it was the coast that
       Was just describing--Yes, it was the coast--
     Lay at this period quiet as the sky,
       The sands untumbled, the blue waves untost,
     And all was stillness, save the sea-bird's cry,
       And dolphin's leap, and little billow crost
     By some low rock or shelve, that made it fret
     Against the boundary it scarcely wet.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And forth they wander'd, her sire being gone,
       As I have said, upon an expedition;
     And mother, brother, guardian, she had none,
       Save Zoe, who, although with due precision
     She waited on her lady with the sun,
       Thought daily service was her only mission,
     Bringing warm water, wreathing her long tresses,
     And asking now and then for cast-off dresses.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It was the cooling hour, just when the rounded
       Red sun sinks down behind the azure hill,
     Which then seems as if the whole earth it bounded,
       Circling all nature, hush'd, and dim, and still,
     With the far mountain-crescent half surrounded
       On one side, and the deep sea calm and chill
     Upon the other, and the rosy sky,
     With one star sparkling through it like an eye.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And thus they wander'd forth, and hand in hand,
       Over the shining pebbles and the shells,
     Glided along the smooth and harden'd sand,
       And in the worn and wild receptacles
     Work'd by the storms, yet work'd as it were plann'd,
       In hollow halls, with sparry roofs and cells,
     They turn'd to rest; and, each clasp'd by an arm,
     Yielded to the deep twilight's purple charm.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They look'd up to the sky, whose floating glow
       Spread like a rosy ocean, vast and bright;
     They gazed upon the glittering sea below,
       Whence the broad moon rose circling into sight;
     They heard the wave's splash, and the wind so low,
       And saw each other's dark eyes darting light
     Into each other--and, beholding this,
     Their lips drew near, and clung into a kiss;

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A long, long kiss, a kiss of youth, and love,
       And beauty, all concentrating like rays
     Into one focus, kindled from above;
       Such kisses as belong to early days,
     Where heart, and soul, and sense, in concert move,
       And the blood 's lava, and the pulse a blaze,
     Each kiss a heart-quake,--for a kiss's strength,
     I think, it must be reckon'd by its length.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     By length I mean duration; theirs endured
       Heaven knows how long--no doubt they never reckon'd;
     And if they had, they could not have secured
       The sum of their sensations to a second:
     They had not spoken; but they felt allured,
       As if their souls and lips each other beckon'd,
     Which, being join'd, like swarming bees they clung--
     Their hearts the flowers from whence the honey sprung.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They were alone, but not alone as they
       Who shut in chambers think it loneliness;
     The silent ocean, and the starlight bay,
       The twilight glow which momently grew less,
     The voiceless sands and dropping caves, that lay
       Around them, made them to each other press,
     As if there were no life beneath the sky
     Save theirs, and that their life could never die.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They fear'd no eyes nor ears on that lone beach,
       They felt no terrors from the night, they were
     All in all to each other: though their speech
       Was broken words, they thought a language there,--
     And all the burning tongues the passions teach
       Found in one sigh the best interpreter
     Of nature's oracle--first love,--that all
     Which Eve has left her daughters since her fall.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Haidde spoke not of scruples, ask'd no vows,
       Nor offer'd any; she had never heard
     Of plight and promises to be a spouse,
       Or perils by a loving maid incurr'd;
     She was all which pure ignorance allows,
       And flew to her young mate like a young bird;
     And, never having dreamt of falsehood, she
     Had not one word to say of constancy.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She loved, and was beloved--she adored,
       And she was worshipp'd; after nature's fashion,
     Their intense souls, into each other pour'd,
       If souls could die, had perish'd in that passion,--
     But by degrees their senses were restored,
       Again to be o'ercome, again to dash on;
     And, beating 'gainst his bosom, Haidee's heart
     Felt as if never more to beat apart.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alas! they were so young, so beautiful,
       So lonely, loving, helpless, and the hour
     Was that in which the heart is always full,
       And, having o'er itself no further power,
     Prompts deeds eternity can not annul,
       But pays off moments in an endless shower
     Of hell-fire--all prepared for people giving
     Pleasure or pain to one another living.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alas! for Juan and Haidee! they were
       So loving and so lovely--till then never,
     Excepting our first parents, such a pair
       Had run the risk of being damn'd for ever;
     And Haidee, being devout as well as fair,
       Had, doubtless, heard about the Stygian river,
     And hell and purgatory--but forgot
     Just in the very crisis she should not.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They look upon each other, and their eyes
       Gleam in the moonlight; and her white arm clasps
     Round Juan's head, and his around her lies
       Half buried in the tresses which it grasps;
     She sits upon his knee, and drinks his sighs,
       He hers, until they end in broken gasps;
     And thus they form a group that 's quite antique,
     Half naked, loving, natural, and Greek.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And when those deep and burning moments pass'd,
       And Juan sunk to sleep within her arms,
     She slept not, but all tenderly, though fast,
       Sustain'd his head upon her bosom's charms;
     And now and then her eye to heaven is cast,
       And then on the pale cheek her breast now warms,
     Pillow'd on her o'erflowing heart, which pants
     With all it granted, and with all it grants.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     An infant when it gazes on a light,
       A child the moment when it drains the breast,
     A devotee when soars the Host in sight,
       An Arab with a stranger for a guest,
     A sailor when the prize has struck in fight,
       A miser filling his most hoarded chest,
     Feel rapture; but not such true joy are reaping
     As they who watch o'er what they love while sleeping.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     For there it lies so tranquil, so beloved,
       All that it hath of life with us is living;
     So gentle, stirless, helpless, and unmoved,
       And all unconscious of the joy 't is giving;
     All it hath felt, inflicted, pass'd, and proved,
       Hush'd into depths beyond the watcher's diving:
     There lies the thing we love with all its errors
     And all its charms, like death without its terrors.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The lady watch'd her lover--and that hour
       Of Love's, and Night's, and Ocean's solitude,
     O'erflow'd her soul with their united power;
       Amidst the barren sand and rocks so rude
     She and her wave-worn love had made their bower,
       Where nought upon their passion could intrude,
     And all the stars that crowded the blue space
     Saw nothing happier than her glowing face.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Alas! the love of women! it is known
       To be a lovely and a fearful thing;
     For all of theirs upon that die is thrown,
       And if 't is lost, life hath no more to bring
     To them but mockeries of the past alone,
       And their revenge is as the tiger's spring,
     Deadly, and quick, and crushing; yet, as real
     Torture is theirs, what they inflict they feel.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They are right; for man, to man so oft unjust,
       Is always so to women; one sole bond
     Awaits them, treachery is all their trust;
       Taught to conceal, their bursting hearts despond
     Over their idol, till some wealthier lust
       Buys them in marriage--and what rests beyond?
     A thankless husband, next a faithless lover,
     Then dressing, nursing, praying, and all 's over.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some take a lover, some take drams or prayers,
       Some mind their household, others dissipation,
     Some run away, and but exchange their cares,
       Losing the advantage of a virtuous station;
     Few changes e'er can better their affairs,
       Theirs being an unnatural situation,
     From the dull palace to the dirty hovel:
     Some play the devil, and then write a novel.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Haidee was Nature's bride, and knew not this;
       Haidee was Passion's child, born where the sun
     Showers triple light, and scorches even the kiss
       Of his gazelle-eyed daughters; she was one
     Made but to love, to feel that she was his
       Who was her chosen: what was said or done
     Elsewhere was nothing. She had naught to fear,
     Hope, care, nor love, beyond, her heart beat here.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And oh! that quickening of the heart, that beat!
       How much it costs us! yet each rising throb
     Is in its cause as its effect so sweet,
       That Wisdom, ever on the watch to rob
     Joy of its alchymy, and to repeat
       Fine truths; even Conscience, too, has a tough job
     To make us understand each good old maxim,
     So good--I wonder Castlereagh don't tax 'em.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And now 't was done--on the lone shore were plighted
       Their hearts; the stars, their nuptial torches, shed
     Beauty upon the beautiful they lighted:
       Ocean their witness, and the cave their bed,
     By their own feelings hallow'd and united,
       Their priest was Solitude, and they were wed:
     And they were happy, for to their young eyes
     Each was an angel, and earth paradise.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O, Love! of whom great Caesar was the suitor,
       Titus the master, Antony the slave,
     Horace, Catullus, scholars, Ovid tutor,
       Sappho the sage blue-stocking, in whose grave
     All those may leap who rather would be neuter
       (Leucadia's rock still overlooks the wave)--
     O, Love! thou art the very god of evil,
     For, after all, we cannot call thee devil.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thou mak'st the chaste connubial state precarious,
       And jestest with the brows of mightiest men:
     Caesar and Pompey, Mahomet, Belisarius,
       Have much employ'd the muse of history's pen;
     Their lives and fortunes were extremely various,
       Such worthies Time will never see again;
     Yet to these four in three things the same luck holds,
     They all were heroes, conquerors, and cuckolds.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thou mak'st philosophers; there 's Epicurus
       And Aristippus, a material crew!
     Who to immoral courses would allure us
       By theories quite practicable too;
     If only from the devil they would insure us,
       How pleasant were the maxim (not quite new),
     'Eat, drink, and love, what can the rest avail us?'
     So said the royal sage Sardanapalus.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But Juan! had he quite forgotten Julia?
       And should he have forgotten her so soon?
     I can't but say it seems to me most truly
       Perplexing question; but, no doubt, the moon
     Does these things for us, and whenever newly
       Strong palpitation rises, 't is her boon,
     Else how the devil is it that fresh features
     Have such a charm for us poor human creatures?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I hate inconstancy--I loathe, detest,
       Abhor, condemn, abjure the mortal made
     Of such quicksilver clay that in his breast
       No permanent foundation can be laid;
     Love, constant love, has been my constant guest,
       And yet last night, being at a masquerade,
     I saw the prettiest creature, fresh from Milan,
     Which gave me some sensations like a villain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But soon Philosophy came to my aid,
       And whisper'd, 'Think of every sacred tie!'
     'I will, my dear Philosophy!' I said,
       'But then her teeth, and then, oh, Heaven! her eye!
     I'll just inquire if she be wife or maid,
       Or neither--out of curiosity.'
     'Stop!' cried Philosophy, with air so Grecian
     (Though she was masqued then as a fair Venetian);

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Stop!' so I stopp'd.--But to return: that which
       Men call inconstancy is nothing more
     Than admiration due where nature's rich
       Profusion with young beauty covers o'er
     Some favour'd object; and as in the niche
       A lovely statue we almost adore,
     This sort of adoration of the real
     Is but a heightening of the 'beau ideal.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is the perception of the beautiful,
       A fine extension of the faculties,
     Platonic, universal, wonderful,
       Drawn from the stars, and filter'd through the skies,
     Without which life would be extremely dull;
       In short, it is the use of our own eyes,
     With one or two small senses added, just
     To hint that flesh is form'd of fiery dust.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet 't is a painful feeling, and unwilling,
       For surely if we always could perceive
     In the same object graces quite as killing
       As when she rose upon us like an Eve,
     'T would save us many a heartache, many a shilling
       (For we must get them any how or grieve),
     Whereas if one sole lady pleased for ever,
     How pleasant for the heart as well as liver!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The heart is like the sky, a part of heaven,
       But changes night and day, too, like the sky;
     Now o'er it clouds and thunder must be driven,
       And darkness and destruction as on high:
     But when it hath been scorch'd, and pierced, and riven,
       Its storms expire in water-drops; the eye
     Pours forth at last the heart's blood turn'd to tears,
     Which make the English climate of our years.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The liver is the lazaret of bile,
       But very rarely executes its function,
     For the first passion stays there such a while,
       That all the rest creep in and form a junction,
     Life knots of vipers on a dunghill's soil,--
       Rage, fear, hate, jealousy, revenge, compunction,--
     So that all mischiefs spring up from this entrail,
     Like earthquakes from the hidden fire call'd 'central,'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In the mean time, without proceeding more
       In this anatomy, I 've finish'd now
     Two hundred and odd stanzas as before,
       That being about the number I 'll allow
     Each canto of the twelve, or twenty-four;
       And, laying down my pen, I make my bow,
     Leaving Don Juan and Haidee to plead
     For them and theirs with all who deign to read.

TITLE Don Juan, III 

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Hail, Muse! et cetera.--We left Juan sleeping,
       Pillow'd upon a fair and happy breast,
     And watch'd by eyes that never yet knew weeping,
       And loved by a young heart, too deeply blest
     To feel the poison through her spirit creeping,
       Or know who rested there, a foe to rest,
     Had soil'd the current of her sinless years,
     And turn'd her pure heart's purest blood to tears!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O, Love! what is it in this world of ours
       Which makes it fatal to be loved? Ah, why
     With cypress branches hast thou Wreathed thy bowers,
       And made thy best interpreter a sigh?
     As those who dote on odours pluck the flowers,
       And place them on their breast--but place to die--
     Thus the frail beings we would fondly cherish
     Are laid within our bosoms but to perish.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In her first passion woman loves her lover,
       In all the others all she loves is love,
     Which grows a habit she can ne'er get over,
       And fits her loosely--like an easy glove,
     As you may find, whene'er you like to prove her:
       One man alone at first her heart can move;
     She then prefers him in the plural number,
     Not finding that the additions much encumber.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I know not if the fault be men's or theirs;
       But one thing 's pretty sure; a woman planted
     (Unless at once she plunge for life in prayers)
       After a decent time must be gallanted;
     Although, no doubt, her first of love affairs
       Is that to which her heart is wholly granted;
     Yet there are some, they say, who have had none,
     But those who have ne'er end with only one.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is melancholy, and a fearful sign
       Of human frailty, folly, also crime,
     That love and marriage rarely can combine,
       Although they both are born in the same clime;
     Marriage from love, like vinegar from wine--
       A sad, sour, sober beverage--by time
     Is sharpen'd from its high celestial flavour
     Down to a very homely household savour.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There 's something of antipathy, as 't were,
       Between their present and their future state;
     A kind of flattery that 's hardly fair
       Is used until the truth arrives too late--
     Yet what can people do, except despair?
       The same things change their names at such a rate;
     For instance--passion in a lover 's glorious,
     But in a husband is pronounced uxorious.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Men grow ashamed of being so very fond;
       They sometimes also get a little tired
     (But that, of course, is rare), and then despond:
       The same things cannot always be admired,
     Yet 't is 'so nominated in the bond,'
       That both are tied till one shall have expired.
     Sad thought! to lose the spouse that was adorning
     Our days, and put one's servants into mourning.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There 's doubtless something in domestic doings
       Which forms, in fact, true love's antithesis;
     Romances paint at full length people's wooings,
       But only give a bust of marriages;
     For no one cares for matrimonial cooings,
       There 's nothing wrong in a connubial kiss:
     Think you, if Laura had been Petrarch's wife,
     He would have written sonnets all his life?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     All tragedies are finish'd by a death,
       All comedies are ended by a marriage;
     The future states of both are left to faith,
       For authors fear description might disparage
     The worlds to come of both, or fall beneath,
       And then both worlds would punish their miscarriage;
     So leaving each their priest and prayer-book ready,
     They say no more of Death or of the Lady.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The only two that in my recollection
       Have sung of heaven and hell, or marriage, are
     Dante and Milton, and of both the affection
       Was hapless in their nuptials, for some bar
     Of fault or temper ruin'd the connection
       (Such things, in fact, it don't ask much to mar):
     But Dante's Beatrice and Milton's Eve
     Were not drawn from their spouses, you conceive.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some persons say that Dante meant theology
       By Beatrice, and not a mistress--I,
     Although my opinion may require apology,
       Deem this a commentator's fantasy,
     Unless indeed it was from his own knowledge he
       Decided thus, and show'd good reason why;
     I think that Dante's more abstruse ecstatics
     Meant to personify the mathematics.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Haidee and Juan were not married, but
       The fault was theirs, not mine; it is not fair,
     Chaste reader, then, in any way to put
       The blame on me, unless you wish they were;
     Then if you 'd have them wedded, please to shut
       The book which treats of this erroneous pair,
     Before the consequences grow too awful;
     'T is dangerous to read of loves unlawful.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet they were happy,--happy in the illicit
       Indulgence of their innocent desires;
     But more imprudent grown with every visit,
       Haidee forgot the island was her sire's;
     When we have what we like, 't is hard to miss it,
       At least in the beginning, ere one tires;
     Thus she came often, not a moment losing,
     Whilst her piratical papa was cruising.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Let not his mode of raising cash seem strange,
       Although he fleeced the flags of every nation,
     For into a prime minister but change
       His title, and 't is nothing but taxation;
     But he, more modest, took an humbler range
       Of life, and in an honester vocation
     Pursued o'er the high seas his watery journey,
     And merely practised as a sea-attorney.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The good old gentleman had been detain'd
       By winds and waves, and some important captures;
     And, in the hope of more, at sea remain'd,
       Although a squall or two had damp'd his raptures,
     By swamping one of the prizes; he had chain'd
       His prisoners, dividing them like chapters
     In number'd lots; they all had cuffs and collars,
     And averaged each from ten to a hundred dollars.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some he disposed of off Cape Matapan,
       Among his friends the Mainots; some he sold
     To his Tunis correspondents, save one man
       Toss'd overboard unsaleable (being old);
     The rest--save here and there some richer one,
       Reserved for future ransom--in the hold
     Were link'd alike, as for the common people he
     Had a large order from the Dey of Tripoli.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The merchandise was served in the same way,
       Pieced out for different marts in the Levant;
     Except some certain portions of the prey,
       Light classic articles of female want,
     French stuffs, lace, tweezers, toothpicks, teapot, tray,
       Guitars and castanets from Alicant,
     All which selected from the spoil he gathers,
     Robb'd for his daughter by the best of fathers.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A monkey, a Dutch mastiff, a mackaw,
       Two parrots, with a Persian cat and kittens,
     He chose from several animals he saw--
       A terrier, too, which once had been a Briton's,
     Who dying on the coast of Ithaca,
       The peasants gave the poor dumb thing a pittance;
     These to secure in this strong blowing weather,
     He caged in one huge hamper altogether.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then having settled his marine affairs,
       Despatching single cruisers here and there,
     His vessel having need of some repairs,
       He shaped his course to where his daughter fair
     Continued still her hospitable cares;
       But that part of the coast being shoal and bare,
     And rough with reefs which ran out many a mile,
     His port lay on the other side o' the isle.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And there he went ashore without delay,
       Having no custom-house nor quarantine
     To ask him awkward questions on the way
       About the time and place where he had been:
     He left his ship to be hove down next day,
       With orders to the people to careen;
     So that all hands were busy beyond measure,
     In getting out goods, ballast, guns, and treasure.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Arriving at the summit of a hill
       Which overlook'd the white walls of his home,
     He stopp'd.--What singular emotions fill
       Their bosoms who have been induced to roam!
     With fluttering doubts if all be well or ill--
       With love for many, and with fears for some;
     All feelings which o'erleap the years long lost,
     And bring our hearts back to their starting-post.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The approach of home to husbands and to sires,
       After long travelling by land or water,
     Most naturally some small doubt inspires--
       A female family 's a serious matter
     (None trusts the sex more, or so much admires--
       But they hate flattery, so I never flatter);
     Wives in their husbands' absences grow subtler,
     And daughters sometimes run off with the butler.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     An honest gentleman at his return
       May not have the good fortune of Ulysses;
     Not all lone matrons for their husbands mourn,
       Or show the same dislike to suitors' kisses;
     The odds are that he finds a handsome urn
       To his memory--and two or three young misses
     Born to some friend, who holds his wife and riches,--
     And that his Argus--bites him by the breeches.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If single, probably his plighted fair
       Has in his absence wedded some rich miser;
     But all the better, for the happy pair
       May quarrel, and the lady growing wiser,
     He may resume his amatory care
       As cavalier servente, or despise her;
     And that his sorrow may not be a dumb one,
     Write odes on the Inconstancy of Woman.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And oh! ye gentlemen who have already
       Some chaste liaison of the kind--I mean
     An honest friendship with a married lady--
       The only thing of this sort ever seen
     To last--of all connections the most steady,
       And the true Hymen (the first 's but a screen)--
     Yet for all that keep not too long away,
     I 've known the absent wrong'd four times a day.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Lambro, our sea-solicitor, who had
       Much less experience of dry land than ocean,
     On seeing his own chimney-smoke, felt glad;
       But not knowing metaphysics, had no notion
     Of the true reason of his not being sad,
       Or that of any other strong emotion;
     He loved his child, and would have wept the loss of her,
     But knew the cause no more than a philosopher.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He saw his white walls shining in the sun,
       His garden trees all shadowy and green;
     He heard his rivulet's light bubbling run,
       The distant dog-bark; and perceived between
     The umbrage of the wood so cool and dun
       The moving figures, and the sparkling sheen
     Of arms (in the East all arm)--and various dyes
     Of colour'd garbs, as bright as butterflies.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And as the spot where they appear he nears,
       Surprised at these unwonted signs of idling,
     He hears--alas! no music of the spheres,
       But an unhallow'd, earthly sound of fiddling!
     A melody which made him doubt his ears,
       The cause being past his guessing or unriddling;
     A pipe, too, and a drum, and shortly after,
     A most unoriental roar of laughter.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And still more nearly to the place advancing,
       Descending rather quickly the declivity,
     Through the waved branches o'er the greensward glancing,
       'Midst other indications of festivity,
     Seeing a troop of his domestics dancing
       Like dervises, who turn as on a pivot, he
     Perceived it was the Pyrrhic dance so martial,
     To which the Levantines are very partial.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And further on a group of Grecian girls,
       The first and tallest her white kerchief waving,
     Were strung together like a row of pearls,
       Link'd hand in hand, and dancing; each too having
     Down her white neck long floating auburn curls
       (The least of which would set ten poets raving);
     Their leader sang--and bounded to her song,
     With choral step and voice, the virgin throng.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And here, assembled cross-legg'd round their trays,
       Small social parties just begun to dine;
     Pilaus and meats of all sorts met the gaze,
       And flasks of Samian and of Chian wine,
     And sherbet cooling in the porous vase;
       Above them their dessert grew on its vine,
     The orange and pomegranate nodding o'er
     Dropp'd in their laps, scarce pluck'd, their mellow store.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A band of children, round a snow-white ram,
       There wreathe his venerable horns with flowers;
     While peaceful as if still an unwean'd lamb,
       The patriarch of the flock all gently cowers
     His sober head, majestically tame,
       Or eats from out the palm, or playful lowers
     His brow, as if in act to butt, and then
     Yielding to their small hands, draws back again.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Their classical profiles, and glittering dresses,
       Their large black eyes, and soft seraphic cheeks,
     Crimson as cleft pomegranates, their long tresses,
       The gesture which enchants, the eye that speaks,
     The innocence which happy childhood blesses,
       Made quite a picture of these little Greeks;
     So that the philosophical beholder
     Sigh'd for their sakes--that they should e'er grow older.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Afar, a dwarf buffoon stood telling tales
       To a sedate grey circle of old smokers,
     Of secret treasures found in hidden vales,
       Of wonderful replies from Arab jokers,
     Of charms to make good gold and cure bad ails,
       Of rocks bewitch'd that open to the knockers,
     Of magic ladies who, by one sole act,
     Transform'd their lords to beasts (but that 's a fact).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Here was no lack of innocent diversion
       For the imagination or the senses,
     Song, dance, wine, music, stories from the Persian,
       All pretty pastimes in which no offence is;
     But Lambro saw all these things with aversion,
       Perceiving in his absence such expenses,
     Dreading that climax of all human ills,
     The inflammation of his weekly bills.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Ah! what is man? what perils still environ
       The happiest mortals even after dinner--
     A day of gold from out an age of iron
       Is all that life allows the luckiest sinner;
     Pleasure (whene'er she sings, at least) 's a siren,
       That lures, to flay alive, the young beginner;
     Lambro's reception at his people's banquet
     Was such as fire accords to a wet blanket.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He--being a man who seldom used a word
       Too much, and wishing gladly to surprise
     (In general he surprised men with the sword)
       His daughter--had not sent before to advise
     Of his arrival, so that no one stirr'd;
       And long he paused to re-assure his eyes
     In fact much more astonish'd than delighted,
     To find so much good company invited.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He did not know (alas! how men will lie)
       That a report (especially the Greeks)
     Avouch'd his death (such people never die),
       And put his house in mourning several weeks,--
     But now their eyes and also lips were dry;
       The bloom, too, had return'd to Haidee's cheeks,
     Her tears, too, being return'd into their fount,
     She now kept house upon her own account.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Hence all this rice, meat, dancing, wine, and fiddling,
       Which turn'd the isle into a place of pleasure;
     The servants all were getting drunk or idling,
       A life which made them happy beyond measure.
     Her father's hospitality seem'd middling,
       Compared with what Haidee did with his treasure;
     'T was wonderful how things went on improving,
     While she had not one hour to spare from loving.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Perhaps you think in stumbling on this feast
       He flew into a passion, and in fact
     There was no mighty reason to be pleased;
       Perhaps you prophesy some sudden act,
     The whip, the rack, or dungeon at the least,
       To teach his people to be more exact,
     And that, proceeding at a very high rate,
     He show'd the royal penchants of a pirate.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     You 're wrong.--He was the mildest manner'd man
       That ever scuttled ship or cut a throat:
     With such true breeding of a gentleman,
       You never could divine his real thought;
     No courtier could, and scarcely woman can
       Gird more deceit within a petticoat;
     Pity he loved adventurous life's variety,
     He was so great a loss to good society.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Advancing to the nearest dinner tray,
       Tapping the shoulder of the nighest guest,
     With a peculiar smile, which, by the way,
       Boded no good, whatever it express'd,
     He ask'd the meaning of this holiday;
       The vinous Greek to whom he had address'd
     His question, much too merry to divine
     The questioner, fill'd up a glass of wine,

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And without turning his facetious head,
       Over his shoulder, with a Bacchant air,
     Presented the o'erflowing cup, and said,
       'Talking 's dry work, I have no time to spare.'
     A second hiccup'd, 'Our old master 's dead,
       You 'd better ask our mistress who 's his heir.'
     'Our mistress!' quoth a third: 'Our mistress!--pooh!-
     You mean our master--not the old, but new.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     These rascals, being new comers, knew not whom
       They thus address'd--and Lambro's visage fell--
     And o'er his eye a momentary gloom
       Pass'd, but he strove quite courteously to quell
     The expression, and endeavouring to resume
       His smile, requested one of them to tell
     The name and quality of his new patron,
     Who seem'd to have turn'd Haidee into a matron.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'I know not,' quoth the fellow, 'who or what
       He is, nor whence he came--and little care;
     But this I know, that this roast capon 's fat,
       And that good wine ne'er wash'd down better fare;
     And if you are not satisfied with that,
       Direct your questions to my neighbour there;
     He 'll answer all for better or for worse,
     For none likes more to hear himself converse.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I said that Lambro was a man of patience,
       And certainly he show'd the best of breeding,
     Which scarce even France, the paragon of nations,
       E'er saw her most polite of sons exceeding;
     He bore these sneers against his near relations,
       His own anxiety, his heart, too, bleeding,
     The insults, too, of every servile glutton,
     Who all the time was eating up his mutton.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now in a person used to much command--
       To bid men come, and go, and come again--
     To see his orders done, too, out of hand--
       Whether the word was death, or but the chain--
     It may seem strange to find his manners bland;
       Yet such things are, which I can not explain,
     Though doubtless he who can command himself
     Is good to govern--almost as a Guelf.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Not that he was not sometimes rash or so,
       But never in his real and serious mood;
     Then calm, concentrated, and still, and slow,
       He lay coil'd like the boa in the wood;
     With him it never was a word and blow,
       His angry word once o'er, he shed no blood,
     But in his silence there was much to rue,
     And his one blow left little work for two.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He ask'd no further questions, and proceeded
       On to the house, but by a private way,
     So that the few who met him hardly heeded,
       So little they expected him that day;
     If love paternal in his bosom pleaded
       For Haidee's sake, is more than I can say,
     But certainly to one deem'd dead, returning,
     This revel seem'd a curious mode of mourning.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If all the dead could now return to life
       (Which God forbid!) or some, or a great many,
     For instance, if a husband or his wife
       (Nuptial examples are as good as any),
     No doubt whate'er might be their former strife,
       The present weather would be much more rainy--
     Tears shed into the grave of the connection
     Would share most probably its resurrection.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He enter'd in the house no more his home,
       A thing to human feelings the most trying,
     And harder for the heart to overcome,
       Perhaps, than even the mental pangs of dying;
     To find our hearthstone turn'd into a tomb,
       And round its once warm precincts palely lying
     The ashes of our hopes, is a deep grief,
     Beyond a single gentleman's belief.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He enter'd in the house--his home no more,
       For without hearts there is no home; and felt
     The solitude of passing his own door
       Without a welcome; there he long had dwelt,
     There his few peaceful days Time had swept o'er,
       There his worn bosom and keen eye would melt
     Over the innocence of that sweet child,
     His only shrine of feelings undefiled.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He was a man of a strange temperament,
       Of mild demeanour though of savage mood,
     Moderate in all his habits, and content
       With temperance in pleasure, as in food,
     Quick to perceive, and strong to bear, and meant
       For something better, if not wholly good;
     His country's wrongs and his despair to save her
     Had stung him from a slave to an enslaver.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The love of power, and rapid gain of gold,
       The hardness by long habitude produced,
     The dangerous life in which he had grown old,
       The mercy he had granted oft abused,
     The sights he was accustom'd to behold,
       The wild seas, and wild men with whom he cruised,
     Had cost his enemies a long repentance,
     And made him a good friend, but bad acquaintance.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But something of the spirit of old Greece
       Flash'd o'er his soul a few heroic rays,
     Such as lit onward to the Golden Fleece
       His predecessors in the Colchian days;
     T is true he had no ardent love for peace--
       Alas! his country show'd no path to praise:
     Hate to the world and war with every nation
     He waged, in vengeance of her degradation.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Still o'er his mind the influence of the clime
       Shed its Ionian elegance, which show'd
     Its power unconsciously full many a time,--
       A taste seen in the choice of his abode,
     A love of music and of scenes sublime,
       A pleasure in the gentle stream that flow'd
     Past him in crystal, and a joy in flowers,
     Bedew'd his spirit in his calmer hours.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But whatsoe'er he had of love reposed
       On that beloved daughter; she had been
     The only thing which kept his heart unclosed
       Amidst the savage deeds he had done and seen;
     A lonely pure affection unopposed:
       There wanted but the loss of this to wean
     His feelings from all milk of human kindness,
     And turn him like the Cyclops mad with blindness.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The cubless tigress in her jungle raging
       Is dreadful to the shepherd and the flock;
     The ocean when its yeasty war is waging
       Is awful to the vessel near the rock;
     But violent things will sooner bear assuaging,
       Their fury being spent by its own shock,
     Than the stern, single, deep, and wordless ire
     Of a strong human heart, and in a sire.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It is a hard although a common case
       To find our children running restive--they
     In whom our brightest days we would retrace,
       Our little selves re-form'd in finer clay,
     Just as old age is creeping on apace,
       And clouds come o'er the sunset of our day,
     They kindly leave us, though not quite alone,
     But in good company--the gout or stone.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet a fine family is a fine thing
       (Provided they don't come in after dinner);
     'T is beautiful to see a matron bring
       Her children up (if nursing them don't thin her);
     Like cherubs round an altar-piece they cling
       To the fire-side (a sight to touch a sinner).
     A lady with her daughters or her nieces
     Shines like a guinea and seven-shilling pieces.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Old Lambro pass'd unseen a private gate,
       And stood within his hall at eventide;
     Meantime the lady and her lover sate
       At wassail in their beauty and their pride:
     An ivory inlaid table spread with state
       Before them, and fair slaves on every side;
     Gems, gold, and silver, form'd the service mostly,
     Mother of pearl and coral the less costly.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The dinner made about a hundred dishes;
       Lamb and pistachio nuts--in short, all meats,
     And saffron soups, and sweetbreads; and the fishes
       Were of the finest that e'er flounced in nets,
     Drest to a Sybarite's most pamper'd wishes;
       The beverage was various sherbets
     Of raisin, orange, and pomegranate juice,
     Squeezed through the rind, which makes it best for use.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     These were ranged round, each in its crystal ewer,
       And fruits, and date-bread loaves closed the repast,
     And Mocha's berry, from Arabia pure,
       In small fine China cups, came in at last;
     Gold cups of filigree made to secure
       The hand from burning underneath them placed,
     Cloves, cinnamon, and saffron too were boil'd
     Up with the coffee, which (I think) they spoil'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The hangings of the room were tapestry, made
       Of velvet panels, each of different hue,
     And thick with damask flowers of silk inlaid;
       And round them ran a yellow border too;
     The upper border, richly wrought, display'd,
       Embroider'd delicately o'er with blue,
     Soft Persian sentences, in lilac letters,
     From poets, or the moralists their betters.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     These Oriental writings on the wall,
       Quite common in those countries, are a kind
     Of monitors adapted to recall,
       Like skulls at Memphian banquets, to the mind
     The words which shook Belshazzar in his hall,
       And took his kingdom from him: You will find,
     Though sages may pour out their wisdom's treasure,
     There is no sterner moralist than Pleasure.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A beauty at the season's close grown hectic,
       A genius who has drunk himself to death,
     A rake turn'd methodistic, or Eclectic
       (For that 's the name they like to pray beneath)--
     But most, an alderman struck apoplectic,
       Are things that really take away the breath,--
     And show that late hours, wine, and love are able
     To do not much less damage than the table.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Haidee and Juan carpeted their feet
       On crimson satin, border'd with pale blue;
     Their sofa occupied three parts complete
       Of the apartment--and appear'd quite new;
     The velvet cushions (for a throne more meet)
       Were scarlet, from whose glowing centre grew
     A sun emboss'd in gold, whose rays of tissue,
     Meridian-like, were seen all light to issue.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Crystal and marble, plate and porcelain,
       Had done their work of splendour; Indian mats
     And Persian carpets, which the heart bled to stain,
       Over the floors were spread; gazelles and cats,
     And dwarfs and blacks, and such like things, that gain
       Their bread as ministers and favourites (that 's
     To say, by degradation) mingled there
     As plentiful as in a court, or fair.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There was no want of lofty mirrors, and
       The tables, most of ebony inlaid
     With mother of pearl or ivory, stood at hand,
       Or were of tortoise-shell or rare woods made,
     Fretted with gold or silver:--by command,
       The greater part of these were ready spread
     With viands and sherbets in ice--and wine--
     Kept for all comers at all hours to dine.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Of all the dresses I select Haidee's:
       She wore two jelicks--one was of pale yellow;
     Of azure, pink, and white was her chemise--
       'Neath which her breast heaved like a little billow;
     With buttons form'd of pearls as large as peas,
       All gold and crimson shone her jelick's fellow,
     And the striped white gauze baracan that bound her,
     Like fleecy clouds about the moon, flow'd round her.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     One large gold bracelet clasp'd each lovely arm,
       Lockless--so pliable from the pure gold
     That the hand stretch'd and shut it without harm,
       The limb which it adorn'd its only mould;
     So beautiful--its very shape would charm;
       And, clinging as if loath to lose its hold,
     The purest ore enclosed the whitest skin
     That e'er by precious metal was held in.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Around, as princess of her father's land,
       A like gold bar above her instep roll'd
     Announced her rank; twelve rings were on her hand;
       Her hair was starr'd with gems; her veil's fine fold
     Below her breast was fasten'd with a band
       Of lavish pearls, whose worth could scarce be told;
     Her orange silk full Turkish trousers furl'd
     About the prettiest ankle in the world.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her hair's long auburn waves down to her heel
       Flow'd like an Alpine torrent which the sun
     Dyes with his morning light,--and would conceal
       Her person if allow'd at large to run,
     And still they seem resentfully to feel
       The silken fillet's curb, and sought to shun
     Their bonds whene'er some Zephyr caught began
     To offer his young pinion as her fan.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Round her she made an atmosphere of life,
       The very air seem'd lighter from her eyes,
     They were so soft and beautiful, and rife
       With all we can imagine of the skies,
     And pure as Psyche ere she grew a wife--
       Too pure even for the purest human ties;
     Her overpowering presence made you feel
     It would not be idolatry to kneel.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her eyelashes, though dark as night, were tinged
       (It is the country's custom), but in vain;
     For those large black eyes were so blackly fringed,
       The glossy rebels mock'd the jetty stain,
     And in their native beauty stood avenged:
       Her nails were touch'd with henna; but again
     The power of art was turn'd to nothing, for
     They could not look more rosy than before.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The henna should be deeply dyed to make
       The skin relieved appear more fairly fair;
     She had no need of this, day ne'er will break
       On mountain tops more heavenly white than her:
     The eye might doubt if it were well awake,
       She was so like a vision; I might err,
     But Shakspeare also says, 't is very silly
     'To gild refined gold, or paint the lily'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan had on a shawl of black and gold,
       But a white baracan, and so transparent
     The sparkling gems beneath you might behold,
       Like small stars through the milky way apparent;
     His turban, furl'd in many a graceful fold,
       An emerald aigrette with Haidee's hair in 't
     Surmounted as its clasp--a glowing crescent,
     Whose rays shone ever trembling, but incessant.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And now they were diverted by their suite,
       Dwarfs, dancing girls, black eunuchs, and a poet,
     Which made their new establishment complete;
       The last was of great fame, and liked to show it:
     His verses rarely wanted their due feet;
       And for his theme--he seldom sung below it,
     He being paid to satirize or flatter,
     As the psalm says, 'inditing a good matter.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He praised the present, and abused the past,
       Reversing the good custom of old days,
     An Eastern anti-jacobin at last
       He turn'd, preferring pudding to no praise--
     For some few years his lot had been o'ercast
       By his seeming independent in his lays,
     But now he sung the Sultan and the Pacha
     With truth like Southey, and with verse like Crashaw.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He was a man who had seen many changes,
       And always changed as true as any needle;
     His polar star being one which rather ranges,
       And not the fix'd--he knew the way to wheedle:
     So vile he 'scaped the doom which oft avenges;
       And being fluent (save indeed when fee'd ill),
     He lied with such a fervour of intention--
     There was no doubt he earn'd his laureate pension.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But he had genius,--when a turncoat has it,
       The 'Vates irritabilis' takes care
     That without notice few full moons shall pass it;
       Even good men like to make the public stare:--
     But to my subject--let me see--what was it?-
       O!--the third canto--and the pretty pair--
     Their loves, and feasts, and house, and dress, and mode
     Of living in their insular abode.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Their poet, a sad trimmer, but no less
       In company a very pleasant fellow,
     Had been the favourite of full many a mess
       Of men, and made them speeches when half mellow;
     And though his meaning they could rarely guess,
       Yet still they deign'd to hiccup or to bellow
     The glorious meed of popular applause,
     Of which the first ne'er knows the second cause.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But now being lifted into high society,
       And having pick'd up several odds and ends
     Of free thoughts in his travels for variety,
       He deem'd, being in a lone isle, among friends,
     That, without any danger of a riot, he
       Might for long lying make himself amends;
     And, singing as he sung in his warm youth,
     Agree to a short armistice with truth.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He had travell'd 'mongst the Arabs, Turks, and Franks,
       And knew the self-loves of the different nations;
     And having lived with people of all ranks,
       Had something ready upon most occasions--
     Which got him a few presents and some thanks.
       He varied with some skill his adulations;
     To 'do at Rome as Romans do,' a piece
     Of conduct was which he observed in Greece.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thus, usually, when he was ask'd to sing,
       He gave the different nations something national;
     'T was all the same to him--'God save the king,'
       Or 'Ca ira,' according to the fashion all:
     His muse made increment of any thing,
       From the high lyric down to the low rational:
     If Pindar sang horse-races, what should hinder
     Himself from being as pliable as Pindar?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In France, for instance, he would write a chanson;
       In England a six canto quarto tale;
     In Spain, he'd make a ballad or romance on
       The last war--much the same in Portugal;
     In Germany, the Pegasus he 'd prance on
       Would be old Goethe's (see what says De Stael);
     In Italy he 'd ape the 'Trecentisti;'
     In Greece, he sing some sort of hymn like this t' ye:

RHYME a b a b c c 

           The isles of Greece, the Isles of Greece!
             Where burning Sappho loved and sung,
           Where grew the arts of war and peace,
             Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung!
           Eternal summer gilds them yet,
           But all, except their sun, is set.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           The Scian and the Teian muse,
             The hero's harp, the lover's lute,
           Have found the fame your shores refuse;
             Their place of birth alone is mute
           To sounds which echo further west
           Than your sires' 'Islands of the Blest.'

RHYME a b a b c c 

           The mountains look on Marathon--
             And Marathon looks on the sea;
           And musing there an hour alone,
             I dream'd that Greece might still be free;
           For standing on the Persians' grave,
           I could not deem myself a slave.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           A king sate on the rocky brow
             Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis;
           And ships, by thousands, lay below,
             And men in nations;--all were his!
           He counted them at break of day--
           And when the sun set where were they?

RHYME a b a b c c 

           And where are they? and where art thou,
             My country? On thy voiceless shore
           The heroic lay is tuneless now--
             The heroic bosom beats no more!
           And must thy lyre, so long divine,
           Degenerate into hands like mine?

RHYME a b a b c c 

           'T is something, in the dearth of fame,
             Though link'd among a fetter'd race,
           To feel at least a patriot's shame,
             Even as I sing, suffuse my face;
           For what is left the poet here?
           For Greeks a blush--for Greece a tear.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           Must we but weep o'er days more blest?
             Must we but blush?--Our fathers bled.
           Earth! render back from out thy breast
             A remnant of our Spartan dead!
           Of the three hundred grant but three,
           To make a new Thermopylae!

RHYME a b a b c c 

           What, silent still? and silent all?
             Ah! no;--the voices of the dead
           Sound like a distant torrent's fall,
             And answer, 'Let one living head,
           But one arise,--we come, we come!'
           'T is but the living who are dumb.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           In vain--in vain: strike other chords;
             Fill high the cup with Samian wine!
           Leave battles to the Turkish hordes,
             And shed the blood of Scio's vine!
           Hark! rising to the ignoble call--
           How answers each bold Bacchanal!

RHYME a b a b c c 

           You have the Pyrrhic dance as yet,
             Where is the Pyrrhic phalanx gone?
           Of two such lessons, why forget
             The nobler and the manlier one?
           You have the letters Cadmus gave--
           Think ye he meant them for a slave?

RHYME a b a b c c 

           Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
             We will not think of themes like these!
           It made Anacreon's song divine:
             He served--but served Polycrates--
           A tyrant; but our masters then
           Were still, at least, our countrymen.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           The tyrant of the Chersonese
             Was freedom's best and bravest friend;
           That tyrant was Miltiades!
             O! that the present hour would lend
           Another despot of the kind!
           Such chains as his were sure to bind.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
             On Suli's rock, and Parga's shore,
           Exists the remnant of a line
             Such as the Doric mothers bore;
           And there, perhaps, some seed is sown,
           The Heracleidan blood might own.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           Trust not for freedom to the Franks--
             They have a king who buys and sells;
           In native swords, and native ranks,
             The only hope of courage dwells;
           But Turkish force, and Latin fraud,
           Would break your shield, however broad.

RHYME a b a b c c 

           Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
             Our virgins dance beneath the shade--
           I see their glorious black eyes shine;
             But gazing on each glowing maid,
           My own the burning tear-drop laves,
           To think such breasts must suckle slaves

RHYME a b a b c c 

           Place me on Sunium's marbled steep,
             Where nothing, save the waves and I,
           May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;
             There, swan-like, let me sing and die:
           A land of slaves shall ne'er be mine--
           Dash down yon cup of Samian wine!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thus sung, or would, or could, or should have sung,
       The modern Greek, in tolerable verse;
     If not like Orpheus quite, when Greece was young,
       Yet in these times he might have done much worse:
     His strain display'd some feeling--right or wrong;
       And feeling, in a poet, is the source
     Of others' feeling; but they are such liars,
     And take all colours--like the hands of dyers.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But words are things, and a small drop of ink,
       Falling like dew, upon a thought, produces
     That which makes thousands, perhaps millions, think;
       'T is strange, the shortest letter which man uses
     Instead of speech, may form a lasting link
       Of ages; to what straits old Time reduces
     Frail man, when paper--even a rag like this,
     Survives himself, his tomb, and all that 's his.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And when his bones are dust, his grave a blank,
       His station, generation, even his nation,
     Become a thing, or nothing, save to rank
       In chronological commemoration,
     Some dull MS. oblivion long has sank,
       Or graven stone found in a barrack's station
     In digging the foundation of a closet,
     May turn his name up, as a rare deposit.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And glory long has made the sages smile;
       'T is something, nothing, words, illusion, wind--
     Depending more upon the historian's style
       Than on the name a person leaves behind:
     Troy owes to Homer what whist owes to Hoyle:
       The present century was growing blind
     To the great Marlborough's skill in giving knocks,
     Until his late life by Archdeacon Coxe.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Milton 's the prince of poets--so we say;
       A little heavy, but no less divine:
     An independent being in his day--
       Learn'd, pious, temperate in love and wine;
     But, his life falling into Johnson's way,
       We 're told this great high priest of all the Nine
     Was whipt at college--a harsh sire--odd spouse,
     For the first Mrs. Milton left his house.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     All these are, certes, entertaining facts,
       Like Shakspeare's stealing deer, Lord Bacon's bribes;
     Like Titus' youth, and Caesar's earliest acts;
       Like Burns (whom Doctor Currie well describes);
     Like Cromwell's pranks;--but although truth exacts
       These amiable descriptions from the scribes,
     As most essential to their hero's story,
     They do not much contribute to his glory.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     All are not moralists, like Southey, when
       He prated to the world of 'Pantisocracy;'
     Or Wordsworth unexcised, unhired, who then
       Season'd his pedlar poems with democracy;
     Or Coleridge, long before his flighty pen
       Let to the Morning Post its aristocracy;
     When he and Southey, following the same path,
     Espoused two partners (milliners of Bath).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Such names at present cut a convict figure,
       The very Botany Bay in moral geography;
     Their loyal treason, renegado rigour,
       Are good manure for their more bare biography.
     Wordsworth's last quarto, by the way, is bigger
       Than any since the birthday of typography;
     A drowsy frowzy poem, call'd the 'Excursion.'
     Writ in a manner which is my aversion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He there builds up a formidable dyke
       Between his own and others' intellect;
     But Wordsworth's poem, and his followers, like
       Joanna Southcote's Shiloh, and her sect,
     Are things which in this century don't strike
       The public mind,--so few are the elect;
     And the new births of both their stale virginities
     Have proved but dropsies, taken for divinities.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But let me to my story: I must own,
       If I have any fault, it is digression--
     Leaving my people to proceed alone,
       While I soliloquize beyond expression;
     But these are my addresses from the throne,
       Which put off business to the ensuing session:
     Forgetting each omission is a loss to
     The world, not quite so great as Ariosto.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I know that what our neighbours call 'longueurs'
       (We 've not so good a word, but have the thing
     In that complete perfection which ensures
       An epic from Bob Southey every spring),
     Form not the true temptation which allures
       The reader; but 't would not be hard to bring
     Some fine examples of the epopee,
     To prove its grand ingredient is ennui.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     We learn from Horace, 'Homer sometimes sleeps;'
       We feel without him, Wordsworth sometimes wakes,--
     To show with what complacency he creeps,
       With his dear 'Waggoners,' around his lakes.
     He wishes for 'a boat' to sail the deeps--
       Of ocean?--No, of air; and then he makes
     Another outcry for 'a little boat,'
     And drivels seas to set it well afloat.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If he must fain sweep o'er the ethereal plain,
       And Pegasus runs restive in his 'Waggon,'
     Could he not beg the loan of Charles's Wain?
       Or pray Medea for a single dragon?
     Or if, too classic for his vulgar brain,
       He fear'd his neck to venture such a nag on,
     And he must needs mount nearer to the moon,
     Could not the blockhead ask for a balloon?

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Pedlars,' and 'Boats,' and 'Waggons!' Oh! ye shades
       Of Pope and Dryden, are we come to this?
     That trash of such sort not alone evades
       Contempt, but from the bathos' vast abyss
     Floats scumlike uppermost, and these Jack Cades
       Of sense and song above your graves may hiss--
     The 'little boatman' and his 'Peter Bell'
     Can sneer at him who drew 'Achitophel'!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     T' our tale.--The feast was over, the slaves gone,
       The dwarfs and dancing girls had all retired;
     The Arab lore and poet's song were done,
       And every sound of revelry expired;
     The lady and her lover, left alone,
       The rosy flood of twilight's sky admired;--
     Ave Maria! o'er the earth and sea,
     That heavenliest hour of Heaven is worthiest thee!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Ave Maria! blessed be the hour!
       The time, the clime, the spot, where I so oft
     Have felt that moment in its fullest power
       Sink o'er the earth so beautiful and soft,
     While swung the deep bell in the distant tower,
       Or the faint dying day-hymn stole aloft,
     And not a breath crept through the rosy air,
     And yet the forest leaves seem'd stirr'd with prayer.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Ave Maria! 't is the hour of prayer!
       Ave Maria! 't is the hour of love!
     Ave Maria! may our spirits dare
       Look up to thine and to thy Son's above!
     Ave Maria! oh that face so fair!
       Those downcast eyes beneath the Almighty dove--
     What though 't is but a pictured image?--strike--
     That painting is no idol,--'t is too like.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some kinder casuists are pleased to say,
       In nameless print--that I have no devotion;
     But set those persons down with me to pray,
       And you shall see who has the properest notion
     Of getting into heaven the shortest way;
       My altars are the mountains and the ocean,
     Earth, air, stars,--all that springs from the great Whole,
     Who hath produced, and will receive the soul.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Sweet hour of twilight!--in the solitude
       Of the pine forest, and the silent shore
     Which bounds Ravenna's immemorial wood,
       Rooted where once the Adrian wave flow'd o'er,
     To where the last Caesarean fortress stood,
       Evergreen forest! which Boccaccio's lore
     And Dryden's lay made haunted ground to me,
     How have I loved the twilight hour and thee!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The shrill cicadas, people of the pine,
       Making their summer lives one ceaseless song,
     Were the sole echoes, save my steed's and mine,
       And vesper bell's that rose the boughs along;
     The spectre huntsman of Onesti's line,
       His hell-dogs, and their chase, and the fair throng
     Which learn'd from this example not to fly
     From a true lover,--shadow'd my mind's eye.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O, Hesperus! thou bringest all good things--
       Home to the weary, to the hungry cheer,
     To the young bird the parent's brooding wings,
       The welcome stall to the o'erlabour'd steer;
     Whate'er of peace about our hearthstone clings,
       Whate'er our household gods protect of dear,
     Are gather'd round us by thy look of rest;
     Thou bring'st the child, too, to the mother's breast.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Soft hour! which wakes the wish and melts the heart
       Of those who sail the seas, on the first day
     When they from their sweet friends are torn apart;
       Or fills with love the pilgrim on his way
     As the far bell of vesper makes him start,
       Seeming to weep the dying day's decay;
     Is this a fancy which our reason scorns?
     Ah! surely nothing dies but something mourns!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     When Nero perish'd by the justest doom
       Which ever the destroyer yet destroy'd,
     Amidst the roar of liberated Rome,
       Of nations freed, and the world overjoy'd,
     Some hands unseen strew'd flowers upon his tomb:
       Perhaps the weakness of a heart not void
     Of feeling for some kindness done, when power
     Had left the wretch an uncorrupted hour.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But I 'm digressing; what on earth has Nero,
       Or any such like sovereign buffoons,
     To do with the transactions of my hero,
       More than such madmen's fellow man--the moon's?
     Sure my invention must be down at zero,
       And I grown one of many 'wooden spoons'
     Of verse (the name with which we Cantabs please
     To dub the last of honours in degrees).

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I feel this tediousness will never do--
       'T is being too epic, and I must cut down
     (In copying) this long canto into two;
       They 'll never find it out, unless I own
     The fact, excepting some experienced few;
       And then as an improvement 't will be shown:
     I 'll prove that such the opinion of the critic is
     From Aristotle passim.--See poietikes.

TITLE Don Juan, IV

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

Nothing so difficult as a beginning
       In poesy, unless perhaps the end;
     For oftentimes when Pegasus seems winning
       The race, he sprains a wing, and down we tend,
     Like Lucifer when hurl'd from heaven for sinning;
       Our sin the same, and hard as his to mend,
     Being pride, which leads the mind to soar too far,
     Till our own weakness shows us what we are.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But Time, which brings all beings to their level,
       And sharp Adversity, will teach at last
     Man,Ñand, as we would hope,Ñperhaps the devil,
       That neither of their intellects are vast:
     While youth's hot wishes in our red veins revel,
       We know not thisÑthe blood flows on too fast;
     But as the torrent widens towards the ocean,
     We ponder deeply on each past emotion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     As boy, I thought myself a clever fellow,
       And wish'd that others held the same opinion;
     They took it up when my days grew more mellow,
       And other minds acknowledged my dominion:
     Now my sere fancy 'falls into the yellow
       Leaf,' and Imagination droops her pinion,
     And the sad truth which hovers o'er my desk
     Turns what was once romantic to burlesque.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And if I laugh at any mortal thing,
       'T is that I may not weep; and if I weep,
     'T is that our nature cannot always bring
       Itself to apathy, for we must steep
     Our hearts first in the depths of Lethe's spring,
       Ere what we least wish to behold will sleep:
     Thetis baptized her mortal son in Styx;
     A mortal mother would on Lethe fix.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some have accused me of a strange design
       Against the creed and morals of the land,
     And trace it in this poem every line:
       I don't pretend that I quite understand
     My own meaning when I would be very fine;
       But the fact is that I have nothing plann'd,
     Unless it were to be a moment merry,
     A novel word in my vocabulary.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     To the kind reader of our sober clime
       This way of writing will appear exotic;
     Pulci was sire of the half-serious rhyme,
       Who sang when chivalry was more Quixotic,
     And revell'd in the fancies of the time,
       True knights, chaste dames, huge giants, kings despotic:
     But all these, save the last, being obsolete,
     I chose a modern subject as more meet.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     How I have treated it, I do not know;
       Perhaps no better than they have treated me
     Who have imputed such designs as show
       Not what they saw, but what they wish'd to see:
     But if it gives them pleasure, be it so;
       This is a liberal age, and thoughts are free:
     Meantime Apollo plucks me by the ear,
     And tells me to resume my story here.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Young Juan and his lady-love were left
       To their own hearts' most sweet society;
     Even Time the pitiless in sorrow cleft
       With his rude scythe such gentle bosoms; he
     Sigh'd to behold them of their hours bereft,
       Though foe to love; and yet they could not be
     Meant to grow old, but die in happy spring,
     Before one charm or hope had taken wing.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Their faces were not made for wrinkles, their
       Pure blood to stagnate, their great hearts to fail;
     The blank grey was not made to blast their hair,
       But like the climes that know nor snow nor hail
     They were all summer: lightning might assail
       And shiver them to ashes, but to trail
     A long and snake-like life of dull decay
     Was not for themÑthey had too little day.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They were alone once more; for them to be
       Thus was another Eden; they were never
     Weary, unless when separate: the tree
       Cut from its forest root of yearsÑthe river
     Damm'd from its fountainÑthe child from the knee
       And breast maternal wean'd at once for ever,Ñ
     Would wither less than these two torn apart;
     Alas! there is no instinct like the heartÑ

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The heartÑwhich may be broken: happy they!
       Thrice fortunate! who of that fragile mould,
     The precious porcelain of human clay,
       Break with the first fall: they can ne'er behold
     The long year link'd with heavy day on day,
       And all which must be borne, and never told;
     While life's strange principle will often lie
     Deepest in those who long the most to die.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Whom the gods love die young,' was said of yore,
       And many deaths do they escape by this:
     The death of friends, and that which slays even moreÑ
       The death of friendship, love, youth, all that is,
     Except mere breath; and since the silent shore
       Awaits at last even those who longest miss
     The old archer's shafts, perhaps the early grave
     Which men weep over may be meant to save.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Haidee and Juan thought not of the deadÑ
       The heavens, and earth, and air, seem'd made for them:
     They found no fault with Time, save that he fled;
       They saw not in themselves aught to condemn:
     Each was the other's mirror, and but read
       Joy sparkling in their dark eyes like a gem,
     And knew such brightness was but the reflection
     Of their exchanging glances of affection.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The gentle pressure, and the thrilling touch,
       The least glance better understood than words,
     Which still said all, and ne'er could say too much;
       A language, too, but like to that of birds,
     Known but to them, at least appearing such
       As but to lovers a true sense affords;
     Sweet playful phrases, which would seem absurd
     To those who have ceased to hear such, or ne'er heard,Ñ

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     All these were theirs, for they were children still,
       And children still they should have ever been;
     They were not made in the real world to fill
       A busy character in the dull scene,
     But like two beings born from out a rill,
       A nymph and her beloved, all unseen
     To pass their lives in fountains and on flowers,
     And never know the weight of human hours.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Moons changing had roll'd on, and changeless found
       Those their bright rise had lighted to such joys
     As rarely they beheld throughout their round;
       And these were not of the vain kind which cloys,
     For theirs were buoyant spirits, never bound
       By the mere senses; and that which destroys
     Most love, possession, unto them appear'd
     A thing which each endearment more endear'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O beautiful! and rare as beautiful
       But theirs was love in which the mind delights
     To lose itself when the old world grows dull,
       And we are sick of its hack sounds and sights,
     Intrigues, adventures of the common school,
       Its petty passions, marriages, and flights,
     Where Hymen's torch but brands one strumpet more,
     Whose husband only knows her not a whÑre.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Hard words; harsh truth; a truth which many know.
       Enough.ÑThe faithful and the fairy pair,
     Who never found a single hour too slow,
       What was it made them thus exempt from care?
     Young innate feelings all have felt below,
       Which perish in the rest, but in them were
     InherentÑwhat we mortals call romantic,
     And always envy, though we deem it frantic.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     This is in others a factitious state,
       An opium dream of too much youth and reading,
     But was in them their nature or their fate:
       No novels e'er had set their young hearts bleeding,
     For Haidee's knowledge was by no means great,
       And Juan was a boy of saintly breeding;
     So that there was no reason for their loves
     More than for those of nightingales or doves.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They gazed upon the sunset; 't is an hour
       Dear unto all, but dearest to their eyes,
     For it had made them what they were: the power
       Of love had first o'erwhelm'd them from such skies,
     When happiness had been their only dower,
       And twilight saw them link'd in passion's ties;
     Charm'd with each other, all things charm'd that brought
     The past still welcome as the present thought.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I know not why, but in that hour to-night,
       Even as they gazed, a sudden tremor came,
     And swept, as 't were, across their hearts' delight,
       Like the wind o'er a harp-string, or a flame,
     When one is shook in sound, and one in sight;
       And thus some boding flash'd through either frame,
     And call'd from Juan's breast a faint low sigh,
     While one new tear arose in Haidee's eye.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     That large black prophet eye seem'd to dilate
       And follow far the disappearing sun,
     As if their last day! of a happy date
       With his broad, bright, and dropping orb were gone;
     Juan gazed on her as to ask his fateÑ
       He felt a grief, but knowing cause for none,
     His glance inquired of hers for some excuse
     For feelings causeless, or at least abstruse.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She turn'd to him, and smiled, but in that sort
       Which makes not others smile; then turn'd aside:
     Whatever feeling shook her, it seem'd short,
       And master'd by her wisdom or her pride;
     When Juan spoke, tooÑit might be in sportÑ
       Of this their mutual feeling, she repliedÑ
     'If it should be so,ÑbutÑit cannot beÑ
     Or I at least shall not survive to see.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan would question further, but she press'd
       His lip to hers, and silenced him with this,
     And then dismiss'd the omen from her breast,
       Defying augury with that fond kiss;
     And no doubt of all methods 't is the best:
       Some people prefer wineÑ't is not amiss;
     I have tried both; so those who would a part take
     May choose between the headache and the heartache.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     One of the two, according to your choice,
       Woman or wine, you 'll have to undergo;
     Both maladies are taxes on our joys:
       But which to choose, I really hardly know;
     And if I had to give a casting voice,
       For both sides I could many reasons show,
     And then decide, without great wrong to either,
     It were much better to have both than neither.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan and Haidee gazed upon each other
       With swimming looks of speechless tenderness,
     Which mix'd all feelings, friend, child, lover, brother,
       All that the best can mingle and express
     When two pure hearts are pour'd in one another,
       And love too much, and yet can not love less;
     But almost sanctify the sweet excess
     By the immortal wish and power to bless.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Mix'd in each other's arms, and heart in heart,
       Why did they not then die?Ñthey had lived too long
     Should an hour come to bid them breathe apart;
       Years could but bring them cruel things or wrong;
     The world was not for them, nor the world's art
       For beings passionate as Sappho's song;
     Love was born with them, in them, so intense,
     It was their very spiritÑnot a sense.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They should have lived together deep in woods,
       Unseen as sings the nightingale; they were
     Unfit to mix in these thick solitudes
       Call'd social, haunts of Hate, and Vice, and Care:
     How lonely every freeborn creature broods!
       The sweetest song-birds nestle in a pair;
     The eagle soars alone; the gull and crow
     Flock o'er their carrion, just like men below.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Now pillow'd cheek to cheek, in loving sleep,
       Haidee and Juan their siesta took,
     A gentle slumber, but it was not deep,
       For ever and anon a something shook
     Juan, and shuddering o'er his frame would creep;
       And Haidee's sweet lips murmur'd like a brook
     A wordless music, and her face so fair
     Stirr'd with her dream, as rose-leaves with the air.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Or as the stirring of a deep dear stream
       Within an Alpine hollow, when the wind
     Walks o'er it, was she shaken by the dream,
       The mystical usurper of the mindÑ
     O'erpowering us to be whate'er may seem
       Good to the soul which we no more can bind;
     Strange state of being! (for 't is still to be)
     Senseless to feel, and with seal'd eyes to see.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She dream'd of being alone on the sea-shore,
       Chain'd to a rock; she knew not how, but stir
     She could not from the spot, and the loud roar
       Grew, and each wave rose roughly, threatening her;
     And o'er her upper lip they seem'd to pour,
       Until she sobb'd for breath, and soon they were
     Foaming o'er her lone head, so fierce and highÑ
     Each broke to drown her, yet she could not die.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     AnonÑshe was released, and then she stray'd
       O'er the sharp shingles with her bleeding feet,
     And stumbled almost every step she made;
       And something roll'd before her in a sheet,
     Which she must still pursue howe'er afraid:
       'T was white and indistinct, nor stopp'd to meet
     Her glance nor grasp, for still she gazed, and grasp'd,
     And ran, but it escaped her as she clasp'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The dream changed:Ñin a cave she stood, its walls
       Were hung with marble icicles, the work
     Of ages on its water-fretted halls,
       Where waves might wash, and seals might breed and lurk;
     Her hair was dripping, and the very balls
       Of her black eyes seem'd turn'd to tears, and mirk
     The sharp rocks look'd below each drop they caught,
     Which froze to marble as it fell,Ñshe thought.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And wet, and cold, and lifeless at her feet,
       Pale as the foam that froth'd on his dead brow,
     Which she essay'd in vain to clear (how sweet
       Were once her cares, how idle seem'd they now!),
     Lay Juan, nor could aught renew the beat
       Of his quench'd heart; and the sea dirges low
     Rang in her sad ears like a mermaid's song,
     And that brief dream appear'd a life too long.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And gazing on the dead, she thought his face
       Faded, or alter'd into something newÑ
     Like to her father's features, till each traceÑ
       More like and like to Lambro's aspect grewÑ
     With all his keen worn look and Grecian grace;
       And starting, she awoke, and what to view?
     O! Powers of Heaven! what dark eye meets she there?
     'T isÑ't is her father'sÑfix'd upon the pair!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then shrieking, she arose, and shrieking fell,
       With joy and sorrow, hope and fear, to see
     Him whom she deem'd a habitant where dwell
       The ocean-buried, risen from death, to be
     Perchance the death of one she loved too well:
       Dear as her father had been to Haidee,
     It was a moment of that awful kindÑ
     I have seen suchÑbut must not call to mind.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Up Juan sprung to Haidee's bitter shriek,
       And caught her falling, and from off the wall
     Snatch'd down his sabre, in hot haste to wreak
       Vengeance on him who was the cause of all:
     Then Lambro, who till now forbore to speak,
       Smiled scornfully, and said, 'Within my call,
     A thousand scimitars await the word;
     Put up, young man, put up your silly sword.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And Haidee clung around him; 'Juan, 't isÑ
       'T is LambroÑ't is my father! Kneel with meÑ
     He will forgive usÑyesÑit must beÑyes.
       O! dearest father, in this agony
     Of pleasure and of painÑeven while I kiss
       Thy garment's hem with transport, can it be
     That doubt should mingle with my filial joy?
     Deal with me as thou wilt, but spare this boy.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     High and inscrutable the old man stood,
       Calm in his voice, and calm within his eyeÑ
     Not always signs with him of calmest mood:
       He look'd upon her, but gave no reply;
     Then turn'd to Juan, in whose cheek the blood
       Oft came and went, as there resolved to die;
     In arms, at least, he stood, in act to spring
     On the first foe whom Lambro's call might bring.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Young man, your sword;' so Lambro once more said:
       Juan replied, 'Not while this arm is free.'
     The old man's cheek grew pale, but not with dread,
       And drawing from his belt a pistol, he
     Replied, 'Your blood be then on your own head.'
       Then look'd dose at the flint, as if to see
     'T was freshÑfor he had lately used the lockÑ
     And next proceeded quietly to cock.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It has a strange quick jar upon the ear,
       That cocking of a pistol, when you know
     A moment more will bring the sight to bear
       Upon your person, twelve yards off, or so;
     A gentlemanly distance, not too near,
       If you have got a former friend for foe;
     But after being fired at once or twice,
     The ear becomes more Irish, and less nice.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Lambro presented, and one instant more
       Had stopp'd this Canto, and Don Juan's breath,
     When Haidee threw herself her boy before;
       Stern as her sire: 'On me,' she cried, 'let death
     DescendÑthe fault is mine; this fatal shore
       He foundÑbut sought not. I have pledged my faith;
     I love himÑI will die with him: I knew
     Your nature's firmnessÑknow your daughter's too.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A minute past, and she had been all tears,
       And tenderness, and infancy; but now
     She stood as one who champion'd human fearsÑ
       Pale, statue-like, and stern, she woo'd the blow;
     And tall beyond her sex, and their compeers,
       She drew up to her height, as if to show
     A fairer mark; and with a fix'd eye scann'd
     Her father's faceÑbut never stopp'd his hand.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He gazed on her, and she on him; 't was strange
       How like they look'd! the expression was the same;
     Serenely savage, with a little change
       In the large dark eye's mutual-darted flame;
     For she, too, was as one who could avenge,
       If cause should beÑa lioness, though tame.
     Her father's blood before her father's face
     Boil'd up, and proved her truly of his race.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I said they were alike, their features and
       Their stature, differing but in sex and years;
     Even to the delicacy of their hand
       There was resemblance, such as true blood wears;
     And now to see them, thus divided, stand
       In fix'd ferocity, when joyous tears
     And sweet sensations should have welcomed both,
     Show what the passions are in their full growth.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The father paused a moment, then withdrew
       His weapon, and replaced it; but stood still,
     And looking on her, as to look her through,
       'Not I,' he said, 'have sought this stranger's ill;
     Not I have made this desolation: few
       Would bear such outrage, and forbear to kill;
     But I must do my dutyÑhow thou hast
     Done thine, the present vouches for the past.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Let him disarm; or, by my father's head,
       His own shall roll before you like a ball!'
     He raised his whistle, as the word he said,
       And blew; another answer'd to the call,
     And rushing in disorderly, though led,
       And arm'd from boot to turban, one and all,
     Some twenty of his train came, rank on rank;
     He gave the word,Ñ'Arrest or slay the Frank.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Then, with a sudden movement, he withdrew
       His daughter; while compress'd within his clasp,
     'Twixt her and Juan interposed the crew;
       In vain she struggled in her father's graspÑ
     His arms were like a serpent's coil: then flew
       Upon their prey, as darts an angry asp,
     The file of pirates; save the foremost, who
     Had fallen, with his right shoulder half cut through.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The second had his cheek laid open; but
       The third, a wary, cool old sworder, took
     The blows upon his cutlass, and then put
       His own well in; so well, ere you could look,
     His man was floor'd, and helpless at his foot,
       With the blood running like a little brook
     From two smart sabre gashes, deep and redÑ
     One on the arm, the other on the head.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And then they bound him where he fell, and bore
       Juan from the apartment: with a sign
     Old Lambro bade them take him to the shore,
       Where lay some ships which were to sail at nine.
     They laid him in a boat, and plied the oar
       Until they reach'd some galliots, placed in line;
     On board of one of these, and under hatches,
     They stow'd him, with strict orders to the watches.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The world is full of strange vicissitudes,
       And here was one exceedingly unpleasant:
     A gentleman so rich in the world's goods,
       Handsome and young, enjoying all the present,
     Just at the very time when he least broods
       On such a thing is suddenly to sea sent,
     Wounded and chain'd, so that he cannot move,
     And all because a lady fell in love.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Here I must leave him, for I grow pathetic,
       Moved by the Chinese nymph of tears, green tea!
     Than whom Cassandra was not more prophetic;
       For if my pure libations exceed three,
     I feel my heart become so sympathetic,
       That I must have recourse to black Bohea:
     'T is pity wine should be so deleterious,
     For tea and coffee leave us much more serious,

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Unless when qualified with thee, Cogniac!
       Sweet Naiad of the Phlegethontic rill!
     Ah! why the liver wilt thou thus attack,
       And make, like other nymphs, thy lovers ill?
     I would take refuge in weak punch, but rack
       (In each sense of the word), whene'er I fill
     My mild and midnight beakers to the brim,
     Wakes me next morning with its synonym.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I leave Don Juan for the present, safeÑ
       Not sound, poor fellow, but severely wounded;
     Yet could his corporal pangs amount to half
       Of those with which his Haidee's bosom bounded?
     She was not one to weep, and rave, and chafe,
       And then give way, subdued because surrounded;
     Her mother was a Moorish maid, from Fez,
     Where all is Eden, or a wilderness.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There the large olive rains its amber store
       In marble fonts; there grain, and flower, and fruit,
     Gush from the earth until the land runs o'er;
       But there, too, many a poison-tree has root,
     And midnight listens to the lion's roar,
       And long, long deserts scorch the camel's foot,
     Or heaving whelm the helpless caravan;
     And as the soil is, so the heart of man.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Afric is all the sun's, and as her earth
       Her human day is kindled; full of power
     For good or evil, burning from its birth,
       The Moorish blood partakes the planet's hour,
     And like the soil beneath it will bring forth:
       Beauty and love were Haidee's mother's dower;
     But her large dark eye show'd deep Passion's force,
     Though sleeping like a lion near a source.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her daughter, temper'd with a milder ray,
       Like summer clouds all silvery, smooth, and fair,
     Till slowly charged with thunder they display
       Terror to earth, and tempest to the air,
     Had held till now her soft and milky way;
       But overwrought with passion and despair,
     The fire burst forth from her Numidian veins,
     Even as the Simoom sweeps the blasted plains.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The last sight which she saw was Juan's gore,
       And he himself o'ermaster'd and cut down;
     His blood was running on the very floor
       Where late he trod, her beautiful, her own;
     Thus much she view'd an instant and no more,Ñ
       Her struggles ceased with one convulsive groan;
     On her sire's arm, which until now scarce held
     Her writhing, fell she like a cedar fell'd.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     A vein had burst, and her sweet lips' pure dyes
       Were dabbled with the deep blood which ran o'er;
     And her head droop'd as when the lily lies
       O'ercharged with rain: her summon'd handmaids bore
     Their lady to her couch with gushing eyes;
       Of herbs and cordials they produced their store,
     But she defied all means they could employ,
     Like one life could not hold, nor death destroy.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Days lay she in that state unchanged, though chillÑ
       With nothing livid, still her lips were red;
     She had no pulse, but death seem'd absent still;
       No hideous sign proclaim'd her surely dead;
     Corruption came not in each mind to kill
       All hope; to look upon her sweet face bred
     New thoughts of life, for it seem'd full of soulÑ
     She had so much, earth could not claim the whole.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The ruling passion, such as marble shows
       When exquisitely chisell'd, still lay there,
     But fix'd as marble's unchanged aspect throws
       O'er the fair Venus, but for ever fair;
     O'er the Laocoon's all eternal throes,
       And ever-dying Gladiator's air,
     Their energy like life forms all their fame,
     Yet looks not life, for they are still the same.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She woke at length, but not as sleepers wake,
       Rather the dead, for life seem'd something new,
     A strange sensation which she must partake
       Perforce, since whatsoever met her view
     Struck not on memory, though a heavy ache
       Lay at her heart, whose earliest beat still true
     Brought back the sense of pain without the cause,
     For, for a while, the furies made a pause.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She look'd on many a face with vacant eye,
       On many a token without knowing what;
     She saw them watch her without asking why,
       And reck'd not who around her pillow sat;
     Not speechless, though she spoke not; not a sigh
       Relieved her thoughts; dull silence and quick chat
     Were tried in vain by those who served; she gave
     No sign, save breath, of having left the grave.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Her handmaids tended, but she heeded not;
       Her father watch'd, she turn'd her eyes away;
     She recognized no being, and no spot,
       However dear or cherish'd in their day;
     They changed from room to roomÑbut all forgotÑ
       Gentle, but without memory she lay;
     At length those eyes, which they would fain be weaning
     Back to old thoughts, wax'd full of fearful meaning.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And then a slave bethought her of a harp;
       The harper came, and tuned his instrument;
     At the first notes, irregular and sharp,
       On him her flashing eyes a moment bent,
     Then to the wall she turn'd as if to warp
       Her thoughts from sorrow through her heart re-sent;
     And he begun a long low island song
     Of ancient days, ere tyranny grew strong.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Anon her thin wan fingers beat the wall
       In time to his old tune; he changed the theme,
     And sung of love; the fierce name struck through all
       Her recollection; on her flash'd the dream
     Of what she was, and is, if ye could call
       To be so being; in a gushing stream
     The tears rush'd forth from her o'erclouded brain,
     Like mountain mists at length dissolved in rain.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Short solace, vain relief!Ñthought came too quick,
       And whirl'd her brain to madness; she arose
     As one who ne'er had dwelt among the sick,
       And flew at all she met, as on her foes;
     But no one ever heard her speak or shriek,
       Although her paroxysm drew towards its dose;Ñ
     Hers was a phrensy which disdain'd to rave,
     Even when they smote her, in the hope to save.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet she betray'd at times a gleam of sense;
       Nothing could make her meet her father's face,
     Though on all other things with looks intense
       She gazed, but none she ever could retrace;
     Food she refused, and raiment; no pretence
       Avail'd for either; neither change of place,
     Nor time, nor skill, nor remedy, could give her
     Senses to sleepÑthe power seem'd gone for ever.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Twelve days and nights she wither'd thus; at last,
       Without a groan, or sigh, or glance, to show
     A parting pang, the spirit from her past:
       And they who watch'd her nearest could not know
     The very instant, till the change that cast
       Her sweet face into shadow, dull and slow,
     Glazed o'er her eyesÑthe beautiful, the blackÑ
     O! to possess such lustreÑand then lack!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     She died, but not alone; she held within
       A second principle of life, which might
     Have dawn'd a fair and sinless child of sin;
       But closed its little being without light,
     And went down to the grave unborn, wherein
       Blossom and bough lie wither'd with one blight;
     In vain the dews of Heaven descend above
     The bleeding flower and blasted fruit of love.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Thus livedÑthus died she; never more on her
       Shall sorrow light, or shame. She was not made
     Through years or moons the inner weight to bear,
       Which colder hearts endure till they are laid
     By age in earth: her days and pleasures were
       Brief, but delightfulÑsuch as had not staid
     Long with her destiny; but she sleeps well
     By the sea-shore, whereon she loved to dwell.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     That isle is now all desolate and bare,
       Its dwellings down, its tenants pass'd away;
     None but her own and father's grave is there,
       And nothing outward tells of human clay;
     Ye could not know where lies a thing so fair,
       No stone is there to show, no tongue to say
     What was; no dirge, except the hollow sea's,
     Mourns o'er the beauty of the Cyclades.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But many a Greek maid in a loving song
       Sighs o'er her name; and many an islander
     With her sire's story makes the night less long;
       Valour was his, and beauty dwelt with her:
     If she loved rashly, her life paid for wrongÑ
       A heavy price must all pay who thus err,
     In some shape; let none think to fly the danger,
     For soon or late Love is his own avenger.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But let me change this theme which grows too sad,
       And lay this sheet of sorrows on the shelf;
     I don't much like describing people mad,
       For fear of seeming rather touch'd myselfÑ
     Besides, I 've no more on this head to add;
       And as my Muse is a capricious elf,
     We 'll put about, and try another tack
     With Juan, left half-kill'd some stanzas back.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Wounded and fetter'd, 'cabin'd, cribb'd, confined,'
       Some days and nights elapsed before that he
     Could altogether call the past to mind;
       And when he did, he found himself at sea,
     Sailing six knots an hour before the wind;
       The shores of Ilion lay beneath their leeÑ
     Another time he might have liked to see 'em,
     But now was not much pleased with Cape Sigaeum.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     There, on the green and village-cotted hill, is
       (Flank'd by the Hellespont and by the sea)
     Entomb'd the bravest of the brave, Achilles;
       They say so (Bryant says the contrary):
     And further downward, tall and towering still, is
       The tumulusÑof whom? Heaven knows! 't may be
     Patroclus, Ajax, or ProtesilausÑ
     All heroes, who if living still would slay us.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     High barrows, without marble or a name,
       A vast, untill'd, and mountain-skirted plain,
     And Ida in the distance, still the same,
       And old Scamander (if 't is he) remain;
     The situation seems still form'd for fameÑ
       A hundred thousand men might fight again
     With case; but where I sought for Ilion's walls,
     The quiet sheep feeds, and the tortoise crawls;

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Troops of untended horses; here and there
       Some little hamlets, with new names uncouth;
     Some shepherds (unlike Paris) led to stare
       A moment at the European youth
     Whom to the spot their school-boy feelings bear;
       A turk, with beads in hand and pipe in mouth,
     Extremely taken with his own religion,
     Are what I found thereÑbut the devil a Phrygian.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Don Juan, here permitted to emerge
       From his dull cabin, found himself a slave;
     Forlorn, and gazing on the deep blue surge,
       O'ershadow'd there by many a hero's grave;
     Weak still with loss of blood, he scarce could urge
       A few brief questions; and the answers gave
     No very satisfactory information
     About his past or present situation.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     He saw some fellow captives, who appear'd
       To be Italians, as they were in fact;
     From them, at least, their destiny he heard,
       Which was an odd one; a troop going to act
     In Sicily (all singers, duly rear'd
       In their vocation) had not been attack'd
     In sailing from Livorno by the pirate,
     But sold by the impresario at no high rate.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     By one of these, the buffo of the party,
       Juan was told about their curious case;
     For although destined to the Turkish mart, he
       Still kept his spirits upÑat least his face;
     The little fellow really look'd quite hearty,
       And bore him with some gaiety and grace,
     Showing a much more reconciled demeanour,
     Than did the prima donna and the tenor.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     In a few words he told their hapless story,
       Saying, 'Our Machiavellian impresario,
     Making a signal off some promontory,
       Hail'd a strange brigÑCorpo di Caio Mario!
     We were transferr'd on board her in a hurry,
       Without a Single scudo of salario;
     But if the Sultan has a taste for song,
     We will revive our fortunes before long.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'The prima donna, though a little old,
       And haggard with a dissipated life,
     And subject, when the house is thin, to cold,
       Has some good notes; and then the tenor's wife,
     With no great voice, is pleasing to behold;
       Last carnival she made a deal of strife
     By carrying off Count Cesare Cicogna
     From an old Roman princess at Bologna.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'And then there are the dancers; there 's the Nini,
       With more than one profession, gains by all;
     Then there 's that laughing slut the Pelegrini,
       She, too, was fortunate last carnival,
     And made at least five hundred good zecchini,
       But spends so fast, she has not now a paul;
     And then there 's the GrotescaÑsuch a dancer!
     Where men have souls or bodies she must answer.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'As for the figuranti, they are like
       The rest of all that tribe; with here and there
     A pretty person, which perhaps may strike,
       The rest are hardly fitted for a fair;
     There 's one, though tall and stiffer than a pike,
       Yet has a sentimental kind of air
     Which might go far, but she don't dance with vigour;
     The more 's the pity, with her face and figure.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'As for the men, they are a middling set;
       The musico is but a crack'd old basin,
     But being qualified in one way yet,
       May the seraglio do to set his face in,
     And as a servant some preferment get;
       His singing I no further trust can place in:
     From all the Pope makes yearly 't would perplex
     To find three perfect pipes of the third sex.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'The tenor's voice is spoilt by affectation,
       And for the bass, the beast can only bellow;
     In fact, he had no singing education,
       An ignorant, noteless, timeless, tuneless fellow;
     But being the prima donna's near relation,
       Who swore his voice was very rich and mellow,
     They hired him, though to hear him you 'd believe
     An ass was practising recitative.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     ''T would not become myself to dwell upon
       My own merits, and though youngÑI see, SirÑyou
     Have got a travell'd air, which speaks you one
       To whom the opera is by no means new:
     You 've heard of Raucocanti?ÑI 'm the man;
       The time may come when you may hear me too;
     You was not last year at the fair of Lugo,
     But next, when I 'm engaged to sing thereÑdo go.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'Our baritone I almost had forgot,
       A pretty lad, but bursting with conceit;
     With graceful action, science not a jot,
       A voice of no great compass, and not sweet,
     He always is complaining of his lot,
       Forsooth, scarce fit for ballads in the street;
     In lovers' parts his passion more to breathe,
     Having no heart to show, he shows his teeth.'

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Here Raucocanti's eloquent recital
       Was interrupted by the pirate crew,
     Who came at stated moments to invite all
       The captives back to their sad berths; each threw
     A rueful glance upon the waves (which bright all
       From the blue skies derived a double blue,
     Dancing all free and happy in the sun),
     And then went down the hatchway one by one.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     They heard next dayÑthat in the Dardanelles,
       Waiting for his Sublimity's firman,
     The most imperative of sovereign spells,
       Which every body does without who can,
     More to secure them in their naval cells,
       Lady to lady, well as man to man,
     Were to be chain'd and lotted out per couple,
     For the slave market of Constantinople.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     It seems when this allotment was made out,
       There chanced to be an odd male, and odd female,
     Who (after some discussion and some doubt,
       If the soprano might be deem'd to be male,
     They placed him o'er the women as a scout)
       Were link'd together, and it happen'd the male
     Was Juan,Ñwho, an awkward thing at his age,
     Pair'd off with a Bacchante blooming visage.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     With Raucocanti lucklessly was chain'd
       The tenor; these two hated with a hate
     Found only on the stage, and each more pain'd
       With this his tuneful neighbour than his fate;
     Sad strife arose, for they were so cross-grain'd,
       Instead of bearing up without debate,
     That each pull'd different ways with many an oath,
     'Arcades ambo,' id estÑblackguards both.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Juan's companion was a Romagnole,
       But bred within the March of old Ancona,
     With eyes that look'd into the very soul
       (And other chief points of a 'bella donna'),
     BrightÑand as black and burning as a coal;
       And through her dear brunette complexion shone
     Great wish to pleaseÑa most attractive dower,
     Especially when added to the power.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But all that power was wasted upon him,
       For sorrow o'er each sense held stern command;
     Her eye might flash on his, but found it dim;
       And though thus chain'd, as natural her hand
     Touch'd his, nor thatÑnor any handsome limb
       (And she had some not easy to withstand)
     Could stir his pulse, or make his faith feel brittle;
     Perhaps his recent wounds might help a little.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     No matter; we should ne'er too much enquire,
       But facts are facts: no knight could be more true,
     And firmer faith no ladyeÑlove desire;
       We will omit the proofs, save one or two:
     'T is said no one in hand 'can hold a fire
       By thought of frosty Caucasus;' but few,
     I really think; yet Juan's then ordeal
     Was more triumphant, and not much less real.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Here I might enter on a chaste description,
       Having withstood temptation in my youth,
     But hear that several people take exception
       At the first two books having too much truth;
     Therefore I 'll make Don Juan leave the ship soon,
       Because the publisher declares, in sooth,
     Through needles' eyes it easier for the camel is
     To pass, than those two cantos into families.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     'T is all the same to me; I 'm fond of yielding,
       And therefore leave them to the purer page
     Of Smollett, Prior, Ariosto, Fielding,
       Who say strange things for so correct an age;
     I once had great alacrity in wielding
       My pen, and liked poetic war to wage,
     And recollect the time when all this cant
     Would have provoked remarks which now it shan't.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     As boys love rows, my boyhood liked a squabble;
       But at this hour I wish to part in peace,
     Leaving such to the literary rabble:
       Whether my verse's fame be doom'd to cease
     While the right hand which wrote it still is able,
       Or of some centuries to take a lease,
     The grass upon my grave will grow as long,
     And sigh to midnight winds, but not to song.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Of poets who come down to us through distance
       Of time and tongues, the foster-babes of Fame,
     Life seems the smallest portion of existence;
       Where twenty ages gather o'er a name,
     'T is as a snowball which derives assistance
       From every flake, and yet rolls on the same,
     Even till an iceberg it may chance to grow;
     But, after all, 't is nothing but cold snow.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     And so great names are nothing more than nominal,
       And love of glory 's but an airy lust,
     Too often in its fury overcoming all
       Who would as 't were identify their dust
     From out the wide destruction, which, entombing all,
       Leaves nothing till 'the coming of the just'-
     Save change: I 've stood upon Achilles' tomb,
     And heard Troy doubted; time will doubt of Rome.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     The very generations of the dead
       Are swept away, and tomb inherits tomb,
     Until the memory of an age is fled,
       And, buried, sinks beneath its offspring's doom:
     Where are the epitaphs our fathers read?
       Save a few glean'd from the sepulchral gloom
     Which once-named myriads nameless lie beneath,
     And lose their own in universal death.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I canter by the spot each afternoon
       Where perish'd in his fame the hero-boy,
     Who lived too long for men, but died too soon
       For human vanity, the young De Foix!
     A broken pillar, not uncouthly hewn,
       But which neglect is hastening to destroy,
     Records Ravenna's carnage on its face,
     While weeds and ordure rankle round the base.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     I pass each day where Dante's bones are laid:
       A little cupola, more neat than solemn,
     Protects his dust, but reverence here is paid
       To the bard's tomb, and not the warrior's column.
     The time must come, when both alike decay'd,
       The chieftain's trophy, and the poet's volume,
     Will sink where lie the songs and wars of earth,
     Before Pelides' death, or Homer's birth.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     With human blood that column was cemented,
       With human filth that column is defiled,
     As if the peasant's coarse contempt were vented
       To show his loathing of the spot he soil'd:
     Thus is the trophy used, and thus lamented
       Should ever be those blood-hounds, from whose wild
     Instinct of gore and glory earth has known
     Those sufferings Dante saw in hell alone.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet there will still be bards: though fame is smoke,
       Its fumes are frankincense to human thought;
     And the unquiet feelings, which first woke
       Song in the world, will seek what then they sought;
     As on the beach the waves at last are broke,
       Thus to their extreme verge the passions brought
     Dash into poetry, which is but passion,
     Or at least was so ere it grew a fashion.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     If in the course of such a life as was
       At once adventurous and contemplative,
     Men, who partake all passions as they pass,
       Acquire the deep and bitter power to give
     Their images again as in a glass,
       And in such colours that they seem to live;
     You may do right forbidding them to show 'em,
     But spoil (I think) a very pretty poem.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O! ye, who make the fortunes of all books!
       Benign Ceruleans of the second sex!
     Who advertise new poems by your looks,
       Your 'imprimatur' will ye not annex?
     What! must I go to the oblivious cooks,
       Those Cornish plunderers of Parnassian wrecks?
     Ah! must I then the only minstrel be,
     Proscribed from tasting your Castalian tea!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     What! can I prove 'a lion' then no more?
       A ball-room bard, a foolscap, hot-press darling?
     To bear the compliments of many a bore,
       And sigh, 'I can't get out,' like Yorick's starling;
     Why then I 'll swear, as poet Wordy swore
       (Because the world won't read him, always snarling),
     That taste is gone, that fame is but a lottery,
     Drawn by the blue-coat misses of a coterie.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     O! 'darkly, deeply, beautifully blue,'
       As some one somewhere sings about the sky,
     And I, ye learned ladies, say of you;
       They say your stockings are so (Heaven knows why,
     I have examined few pair of that hue);
       Blue as the garters which serenely lie
     Round the Patrician left-legs, which adorn
     The festal midnight, and the levee morn.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Yet some of you are most seraphic creaturesÑ
       But times are alter'd since, a rhyming lover,
     You read my stanzas, and I read your features:
       AndÑbut no matter, all those things are over;
     Still I have no dislike to learned natures,
       For sometimes such a world of virtues cover;
     I knew one woman of that purple school,
     The loveliest, chastest, best, butÑquite a fool.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Humboldt, 'the first of travellers,' but not
       The last, if late accounts be accurate,
     Invented, by some name I have forgot,
       As well as the sublime discovery's date,
     An airy instrument, with which he sought
       To ascertain the atmospheric state,
     By measuring 'the intensity of blue:'
     O, Lady Daphne! let me measure you!

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But to the narrative:ÑThe vessel bound
       With slaves to sell off in the capital,
     After the usual process, might be found
       At anchor under the seraglio wall;
     Her cargo, from the plague being safe and sound,
       Were landed in the market, one and all,
     And there with Georgians, Russians, and Circassians,
     Bought up for different purposes and passions.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Some went off dearly; fifteen hundred dollars
       For one Circassian, a sweet girl, were given,
     Warranted virgin; beauty's brightest colours
       Had deck'd her out in all the hues of heaven:
     Her sale sent home some disappointed bawlers,
       Who bade on till the hundreds reach'd eleven;
     But when the offer went beyond, they knew
     'T was for the Sultan, and at once withdrew.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     Twelve negresses from Nubia brought a price
       Which the West Indian market scarce would bring;
     Though Wilberforce, at last, has made it twice
       What 't was ere Abolition; and the thing
     Need not seem very wonderful, for vice
       Is always much more splendid than a king:
     The virtues, even the most exalted, Charity,
     Are savingÑvice spares nothing for a rarity.

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     But for the destiny of this young troop,
       How some were bought by pachas, some by Jews,
     How some to burdens were obliged to stoop,
       And others rose to the command of crews
     As renegadoes; while in hapless group,
       Hoping no very old vizier might choose,
     The females stood, as one by one they pick'd 'em,
     To make a mistress, or fourth wife, or victim:

RHYME a b a b a b c c 

     All this must be reserved for further song;
       Also our hero's lot, howe'er unpleasant
     (Because this Canto has become too long),
       Must be postponed discreetly for the present;
     I 'm sensible redundancy is wrong,
       But could not for the muse of me put less in 't:
     And now delay the progress of Don Juan,
     Till what is call'd in Ossian the fifth Juan.

TITLE She Walks in Beauty

RHYME a b a b a b

SHE walks in beauty, like the night	
Of cloudless climes and starry skies,	
And all thatÕs best of dark and bright	
Meet in her aspect and her eyes;	
Thus mellowÕd to that tender light	        
Which heaven to gaudy day denies.	
 
RHYME a b a b a b

One shade the more, one ray the less,	
Had half impairÕd the nameless grace	
Which waves in every raven tress	
Or softly lightens oÕer her face,	        
Where thoughts serenely sweet express	
How pure, how dear their dwelling-place.	
 
RHYME a b a b a b

And on that cheek and oÕer that brow	
So soft, so calm, yet eloquent,	
The smiles that win, the tints that glow	        
But tell of days in goodness spent,Ñ	
A mind at peace with all below,	
A heart whose love is innocent.

TITLE Elegy

RHYME a a b b a

O SNATCHÕD away in beautyÕs bloom!	
  On thee shall press no ponderous tomb;	
  But on thy turf shall roses rear	
  Their leaves, the earliest of the year,	
And the wild cypress wave in tender gloom:	        
 
RHYME a b a b b

  And oft by yon blue gushing stream	
  Shall Sorrow lean her drooping head,	
  And feed deep thought with many a dream,	
  And lingering pause and lightly tread;	
Fond wretch! as if her step disturbÕd the dead.	        

RHYME a b a b c c

  Away! we know that tears are vain,	
  That Death nor heeds nor hears distress:	
  Will this unteach us to complain?	
  Or make one mourner weep the less?	
  And thou, who tellÕst me to forget,	        
Thy looks are wan, thine eyes are wet.

TITLE To Augusta

RHYME a b a b c d c d
 
THOUGH the day of my destinyÕs over,	
  And the star of my fate hath declined,	
Thy soft heart refused to discover	
  The faults which so many could find.	
Though thy soul with my grief was acquainted,	        
  It shrunk not to share it with me,	
And the love which my spirit hath painted	
  It never hath found but in thee.	
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d
 
Then when nature around me is smiling,	
  The last smile which answers to mine,	        
I do not believe it beguiling,	
  Because it reminds me of thine;	
And when winds are at war with the ocean,	
  As the breasts I believed in with me,	
If their billows excite an emotion,	        
  It is that they bear me from thee.	
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d
 
Though the rock of my last hope is shivered,	
  And its fragments are sunk in the wave,	
Though I feel that my soul is delivered	
  To painÑit shall not be its slave.	        
There is many a pang to pursue me:	
  They may crush, but they shall not contemn;	
They may torture, but shall not subdue me;	
  ÕTis of thee that I thinkÑnot of them.	
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d
 
Though human, thou didst not deceive me,	        
  Though woman, thou didst not forsake,	
Though loved, thou forborest to grieve me,	
  Though slanderÕd, thou never couldst shake;	
Though trusted, thou didst not disclaim me,	
  Though parted, it was not to fly,	        
Though watchful, Õtwas not to defame me,	
  Nor, mute, that the world might belie.	
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d
 
Yet I blame not the world, nor despise it,	
  Nor the war of the many with one;	
If my soul was not fitted to prize it,	        
  ÕTwas folly not sooner to shun:	
And if dearly that error hath cost me,	
  And more than I once could foresee,	
I have found that, whatever it lost me,	
  It could not deprive me of thee.	        
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d
 
From the wreck of the past, which hath perishÕd,	
  Thus much I at least may recall,	
It hath taught me that what I most cherishÕd	
  Deserved to be dearest of all:	
In the desert a fountain is springing,	        
  In the wide waste there still is a tree,	
And a bird in the solitude singing,	
  Which speaks to my spirit of thee.

TITLE Maid of Athens

RHYME a a b b c
RHYME-POEM a a b b c

MAID of Athens, ere we part,	
Give, oh, give me back my heart!	
Or, since that has left my breast,	
Keep it now, and take the rest!	
Hear my vow, before I go,	        
 
RHYME a a b b c
RHYME-POEM d d e e c

By those tresses unconfined,	
WooÕd by each ®gean wind;	
By those lids whose jetty fringe	
Kiss thy soft cheeksÕ blooming tinge;	        
By those wild eyes like the roe,	
 
RHYME a a b b c
RHYME-POEM f f g g c

By that lip I long to taste;	
By that zone-encircled waist;	
By all the token-flowers that tell	        
What words can never speak so well;	
By loveÕs alternate joy and woe,	
 
RHYME a a b b c
RHYME-POEM h h i i c

Maid of Athens! I am gone:	
Think of me, sweet! when alone.	        
Though I fly to Istambol,	
Athens holds my heart and soul;	
Can I cease to love thee? No!

TITLE Longing

RHYME a b a b c b c b d d

THE CASTLED crag of Drachenfels	
Frowns oÕer the wide and winding Rhine,	
Whose breast of waters broadly swells	
Between the banks which bear the vine.	
And hills all rich with blossomÕd trees,	        
And fields which promise corn and wine,	
And scatterÕd cities crowning these,	
Whose far white walls along them shine,	
Have strewÕd a scene, which I should see	
With double joy wert thou with me.	        
 
RHYME a b a b c b c b d d

And peasant girls, with deep blue eyes,	
And hands which offer early flowers,	
Walk smiling oÕer this paradise:	
Above, the frequent feudal towers	
Through green leaves lift their walls of gray;	        
And many a rock which steeply lowers,	
And noble arch in proud decay,	
Look oÕer this vale of vintage-bowers;	
But one thing want these banks of Rhine,Ñ	
Thy gentle hand to clasp in mine!	        
 
RHYME a b a b c b c b d d

I send the lilies given to me;	
Though long before thy hand they touch,	
I know that they must witherÕd be,	
But yet reject them not as such;	
For I have cherishÕd them as dear,	        
Because they yet may meet thine eye,	
And guide thy soul to mine even here,	
When thou beholdÕst them, drooping nigh,	
And knowÕst them gatherÕd by the Rhine,	
And offerÕd from my heart to thine!	        
 
RHYME a b a b c b c b d d

The river nobly foams and flows,	
The charm of this enchanted ground,	
And all its thousand turns disclose	
Some fresher beauty varying round:	
The haughtiest breast its wish might bound	        
Through life to dwell delighted here;	
Nor could on earth a spot be found	
To nature and to me so dear,	
Could thy dear eyes in following mine	
Still sweeten more these banks of Rhine!

TITLE Fare Thee Well

RHYME a b a b

FARE thee well! and if for ever,	
  Still for ever, fare thee well:	
Even though unforgiving, never	
  ÕGainst thee shall my heart rebel.	
 
RHYME a b a b

Would that breast were bared before thee	        
  Where thy head so oft hath lain,	
While that placid sleep came oÕer thee	
  Which thou neÕer canst know again:	
 
RHYME a b a b

Would that breast, by thee glanced over,	
  Every inmost thought could show!	        
Then thou wouldst at last discover	
  ÕTwas not well to spurn it so.	
 
RHYME a b a b

Though the world for this commend theeÑ	
  Though it smile upon the blow,	
Even its praises must offend thee,	        
  Founded on anotherÕs woe:	
 
RHYME a b a b

Though my many faults defaced me,	
  Could no other arm be found,	
Than the one which once embraced me,	
  To inflict a cureless wound?	        
 
RHYME a b a b

Yet, oh yet, thyself deceive not;	
  Love may sink by slow decay,	
But by sudden wrench, believe not	
  Hearts can thus be torn away:	
 
RHYME a b a b

Still thine own its life retaineth,	        
  Still must mine, though bleeding, beat;	
And the undying thought which paineth	
  IsÑthat we no more may meet.	
 
RHYME a b a b

These are words of deeper sorrow	
  Than the wail above the dead;	        
Both shall live, but every morrow	
  Wake us from a widowÕd bed.	
 
RHYME a b a b

And when thou wouldst solace gather,	
  When our childÕs first accents flow,	
Wilt thou teach her to say ÔFather!Õ	        
  Though his care she must forego?	
 
RHYME a b a b

When her little hands shall press thee,	
  When her lip to thine is pressÕd,	
Think of him whose prayer shall bless thee,	
  Think of him thy love had blessÕd!	        
 
RHYME a b a b

Should her lineaments resemble	
  Those thou never more mayÕst see,	
Then thy heart will softly tremble	
  With a pulse yet true to me.	
 
RHYME a b a b

All my faults perchance thou knowest,	        
  All my madness none can know;	
All my hopes, whereÕer thou goest,	
  Wither, yet with thee they go.	
 
RHYME a b a b

Every feeling hath been shaken;	
  Pride, which not a world could bow,	        
Bows to theeÑby thee forsaken,	
  Even my soul forsakes me now:	
 
RHYME a b a b

But Õtis doneÑall words are idleÑ	
  Words from me are vainer still;	
But the thoughts we cannot bridle	        
  Force their way without the will.	
 
RHYME a b a b

Fare thee well! thus disunited,	
  Torn from every nearer tie,	
SearÕd in heart, and lone, and blighted,	
  More than this I scarce can die.

TITLE On the Castle of Chillon

RHYME a b b a

ETERNAL SPIRIT of the chainless Mind!	
Brightest in dungeons, Liberty, thou art,Ñ	
For there thy habitation is the heartÑ	
The heart which love of Thee alone can bind;	
 
RHYME a b b a

And when thy sons to fetters are consignÕd,	        
To fetters, and the damp vaultÕs dayless gloom,	
Their country conquers with their martyrdom,	
And FreedomÕs fame finds wings on every wind.	
 
RHYME a b a b a b

Chillon! thy prison is a holy place	
And thy sad floor an altar, for Õtwas trod,	        
Until his very steps have left a trace	
Worn as if thy cold pavement were a sod,	
By Bonnivard! May none those marks efface!	
For they appeal from tyranny to God.

TITLE Song of Saul

RHYME a a b b

WARRIORS and chiefs! should the shaft or the sword	
Pierce me in leading the host of the Lord,	
Heed not the corse, though a kingÕs in your path:	
Bury your steel in the bosoms of Gath!	
 
RHYME a a b b

Thou who art bearing my buckler and bow,	        
Should the soldiers of Saul look away from the foe,	
Stretch me that moment in blood at thy feet!	
Mine be the doom which they dared not to meet.	
 
RHYME a a b b

Farewell to others, but never we part,	
Heir to my royalty, son of my heart!	        
Bright is the diadem, boundless the sway,	
Or kingly the death, which awaits us to-day!

TITLE On This Day I Complete My Thirty-Sixth Year

RHYME a b a b

ÕTIS time this heart should be unmoved,	
  Since others it hath ceased to move:	
Yet, though I cannot be beloved,	
      Still let me love!	
 
RHYME a b a b

My days are in the yellow leaf;	        
  The flowers and fruits of love are gone;	
The worm, the canker, and the grief	
      Are mine alone!	
 
RHYME a b a b

The fire that on my bosom preys	
  Is lone as some volcanic isle;	        
No torch is kindled at its blazeÑ	
      A funeral pile.	
 
RHYME a b a b

The hope, the fear, the jealous care,	
  The exalted portion of the pain	
And power of love, I cannot share,	        
      But wear the chain.	
 
RHYME a b a b

But Õtis not thusÑand Õtis not hereÑ	
  Such thoughts should shake my soul, nor now,	
Where glory decks the heroÕs bier,	
      Or binds his brow.	        
 
RHYME a b a b

The sword, the banner, and the field,	
  Glory and Greece, around me see!	
The Spartan, borne upon his shield,	
      Was not more free.	
 
RHYME a b a b

Awake! (not GreeceÑshe is awake!)	        
  Awake, my spirit! Think through whom	
Thy life-blood tracks its parent lake,	
      And then strike home!	
 
RHYME a b a b

Tread those reviving passions down,	
  Unworthy manhood!Ñunto thee	        
Indifferent should the smile or frown	
      Of beauty be.	
 
RHYME a b a b

If thou regretÕst thy youth, why live?	
  The land of honourable death	
Is here:Ñup to the field, and give	        
      Away thy breath!	
 
RHYME a b a b

Seek outÑless often sought than foundÑ	
  A soldierÕs grave, for thee the best;	
Then look around, and choose thy ground,	
      And take thy rest.

TITLE Elegy on Thyrza

RHYME a b a b c c b d d

AND thou art dead, as young and fair	
  As aught of mortal birth;	
And forms so soft and charms so rare	
  Too soon returnÕd to Earth!	
Though Earth received them in her bed,	        
And oÕer the spot the crowd may tread	
  In carelessness or mirth,	
There is an eye which could not brook	
A moment on that grave to look.	
 
RHYME a b a b c c b d d

I will not ask where thou liest low	        
  Nor gaze upon the spot;	
There flowers or weeds at will may grow	
  So I behold them not:	
It is enough for me to prove	
That what I loved, and long must love	        
  Like common earth can rot;	
To me there needs no stone to tell	
ÕTis Nothing that I loved so well.	
 
RHYME a b a b c c b d d

Yet did I love thee to the last,	
  As fervently as thou	        
Who didst not change through all the past	
  And canst not alter now.	
The love where Death has set his seal	
Nor age can chill, nor rival steal,	
  Nor falsehood disavow:	        
And, what were worse, thou canst not see	
Or wrong, or change, or fault in me.	
 
RHYME a b a b c c b d d

The better days of life were ours;	
  The worst can be but mine:	
The sun that cheers, the storm that lours,	        
  Shall never more be thine.	
The silence of that dreamless sleep	
I envy now too much to weep;	
  Nor need I to repine	
That all those charms have passÕd away	        
I might have watchÕd through long decay.	
 
RHYME a b a b c c b d d

The flower in ripenÕd bloom unmatchÕd	
  Must fall the earliest prey;	
Though by no hand untimely snatchÕd,	
  The leaves must drop away.	        
And yet it were a greater grief	
To watch it withering, leaf by leaf,	
  Than see it pluckÕd today;	
Since earthly eye but ill can bear	
To trace the change to foul from fair.	        
 
RHYME a b a b c c b d d

I know not if I could have borne	
  To see thy beauties fade;	
The night that followÕd such a morn	
  Had worn a deeper shade:	
Thy day without a cloud hath past,	        
And thou wert lovely to the last,	
  ExtinguishÕd, not decayÕd;	
As stars that shoot along the sky	
Shine brightest as they fall from high.	
 
RHYME a b a b c c b d d

As once I wept, if I could weep,	        
  My tears might well be shed	
To think I was not near, to keep	
  One vigil oÕer thy bed:	
To gaze, how fondly! on thy face,	
To fold thee in a faint embrace,	        
  Uphold thy drooping head;	
And show that love, however vain,	
Nor thou nor I can feel again.	
 
RHYME a b a b c c b d d

Yet how much less it were to gain,	
  Though thou hast left me free,	        
The loveliest things that still remain	
  Than thus remember thee!	
The all of thine that cannot die	
Through dark and dread Eternity	
  Returns again to me,	        
And more thy buried love endears	
Than aught except its living years.

TITLE Youth and Age

RHYME a a b b

THEREÕS not a joy the world can give like that it takes away	
When the glow of early thought declines in feelingÕs dull decay;	
ÕTis not on youthÕs smooth cheek the blush alone, which fades so fast,	
But the tender bloom of heart is gone, ere youth itself be past.	
 
RHYME a a b b

Then the few whose spirits float above the wreck of happiness	        
Are driven oÕer the shoals of guilt, or ocean of excess:	
The magnet of their course is gone, or only points in vain	
The shore to which their shiverÕd sail shall never stretch again.	
 
RHYME a a b b

Then the mortal coldness of the soul like death itself comes down;	
It cannot feel for othersÕ woes, it dare not dream its own;	        
That heavy chill has frozen oÕer the fountain of our tears,	
And though the eye may sparkle still, Õtis where the ice appears.	
 
RHYME a a b b

Though wit may flash from fluent lips, and mirth distract the breast,	
Through midnight hours that yield no more their former hope of rest;	
ÕTis but as ivy-leaves around the ruinÕd turret wreathe,	        
All green and wildly fresh without, but worn and gray beneath.	
 
RHYME a a b b

O could I feel as I have felt, or be what I have been,	
Or weep as I could once have wept oÕer many a vanishÕd scene,Ñ	
As springs in deserts found seem sweet, all brackish though they be,	
So midst the witherÕd waste of life, those tears would flow to me!


RHYME a b a b b c b c c d c d e e

    Wonder of these, glory of other times,
      O thou whom envy ev'n is forced t'admire!
      Great Patroness of these my humble rhymes,
      Which thou from out thy greatness dost inspire!
    Since only thou has deigned to raise them higher,
      Vouchsafe now to accept them as thine own,
      Begotten by thy hand and my desire,
      Wherein my zeal and thy great might is shown.
    And seeing this unto the world is known,
      O leave not still to grace thy work in me;
      Let not the quickening seed be overthrown
      Of that which may be born to honor thee,
    Whereof the travail I may challenge mine,
    But yet the glory, Madam, must be thine!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Unto the boundless ocean of thy beauty
      Runs this poor river, charged with streams of zeal,
      Returning thee the tribute of my duty,
      Which here my love, my youth, my plaints reveal.
    Here I unclasp the book of my charged soul,
      Where I have cast th' accounts of all my care;
      Here have I summed my sighs. Here I enrol
      How they were spent for thee. Look, what they are.
    Look on the dear expenses of my youth,
      And see how just I reckon with thine eyes.
      Examine well thy beauty with my truth,
      And cross my cares ere greater sums arise.
    Read it, sweet maid, though it be done but slightly;
    Who can show all his love, doth love but lightly.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Go, wailing verse, the infants of my love,
      Minerva-like, brought forth without a mother;
      Present the image of the cares I prove,
      Witness your father's grief exceeds all other.
    Sigh out a story of her cruel deeds,
      With interrupted accents of despair;
      A monument that whosoever reads,
      May justly praise and blame my loveless Fair;
    Say her disdain hath dried up my blood,
      And starved you, in succours still denying;
      Press to her eyes, importune me some good,
      Waken her sleeping pity with your crying:
    Knock at her hard heart, beg till you have moved her,
    And tell th'unkind how dearly I have loved her.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If so it hap this offspring of my care,
      These fatal anthems, lamentable songs,
      Come to their view, who like afflicted are;
      Let them yet sigh their own, and moan my wrongs.
    But untouched hearts with unaffected eye,
      Approach not to behold my soul's distress;
      Clear-sighted you soon note what is awry,
      Whilst blinded souls mine errors never guess.
    You blinded souls, whom youth and error lead;
      You outcast eaglets dazzled with your sun,
      Do you, and none but you, my sorrows read;
      You best can judge the wrongs that she hath done,
    That she hath done, the motive of my pain,
    Who whilst I love doth kill me with disdain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    These plaintive verse, the posts of my desire,
      Which haste for succour to her slow regard,
      Bear not report of any slender fire,
      Forging a grief to win a fame's reward.
    Nor are my passions limned for outward hue,
      For that no colours can depaint my sorrows;
      Delia herself, and all the world may view
      Best in my face where cares have tilled deep furrows.
    No bays I seek to deck my mourning brow,
      O clear-eyed rector of the holy hill!
      My humble accents bear the olive bough
      Of intercession but to move her will.
    These lines I use t'unburden mine own heart;
    My love affects no fame nor 'steems of art.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Whilst youth and error led my wandering mind,
      And set my thoughts in heedless ways to range,
      All unawares a goddess chaste I find,
      Diana-like, to work my sudden change.
    For her, no sooner had mine eye bewrayed,
      But with disdain to see me in that place,
      With fairest hand the sweet unkindest maid
      Casts water-cold disdain upon my face.
    Which turned my sport into a hart's despair,
      Which still is chased, while I have any breath,
      By mine own thoughts set on me by my Fair.
      My thoughts like hounds pursue me to my death;
    Those that I fostered of mine own accord,
    Are made by her to murder thus their lord.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Fair is my love, and cruel as she's fair;
      Her brow shades frowns although her eyes are sunny;
      Her smiles are lightning though her pride despair;
      And her disdains are gall, her favours honey;
    A modest maid, decked with a blush of honour,
      Whose feet do tread green paths of youth and love;
      The wonder of all eyes that look upon her,
      Sacred on earth, designed a saint above.
    Chastity and beauty, which were deadly foes,
      Live reconciled friends within her brow;
      And had she pity to conjoin with those,
      Then who had heard the plaints I utter now?
    O had she not been fair and thus unkind,
    My Muse had slept and none had known my mind!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    For had she not been fair and thus unkind,
      Then had no finger pointed at my lightness;
      The world had never known what I do find,
      And clouds obscure had shaded still her brightness.
    Then had no censor's eye these lines surveyed,
      Nor graver brows have judged my Muse so vain;
      No sun my blush and error had bewrayed,
      Nor yet the world had heard of such disdain.
    Then had I walked with bold erected face;
      No downcast look had signified my miss;
      But my degraded hopes with such disgrace
      Did force me groan out griefs and utter this.
    For being full, should I not then have spoken,
    My sense oppressed had failed and heart had broken.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Thou, poor heart, sacrificed unto the fairest,
      Hast sent the incense of thy sighs to heaven;
      And still against her frowns fresh vows repairest,
      And made thy passions with her beauty even.
    And you, mine eyes, the agents of my heart,
      Told the dumb message of my hidden grief;
      And oft, with careful tunes, with silent art,
      Did treat the cruel Fair to yield relief.
    And you, my verse, the advocates of love,
      Have followed hard the process of my case:
      And urged that title which doth plainly prove
      My faith should win, if justice might have place.
    Yet though I see that nought we do can move,
    'Tis not disdain must make me cease to love.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If this be love, to draw a weary breath,
      To paint on floods till the shore cry to th'air;
      With downward looks still reading on the earth.
      These sad memorials of my love's despair;
    If this be love, to war against my soul,
      Lie down to wail, rise up to sigh and grieve,
      The never-resting stone of care to roll,
      Still to complain my griefs, whilst none relieve;
    If this be love, to clothe me with dark thoughts,
      Haunting untrodden paths to wail apart,
      My pleasures horror, music tragic notes,
      Tears in mine eyes and sorrow at my heart;
    If this be love, to live a living death,
    Then do I love, and draw this weary breath.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Then do I love and draw this weary breath
      For her, the cruel Fair, within whose brow
      I written find the sentence of my death
      In unkind letters wrote she cares not how.
    Thou power that rul'st the confines of the night,
      Laughter-loving goddess, worldly pleasures' queen,
      Intenerate that heart that sets so light
      The truest love that ever yet was seen;
    And cause her leave to triumph in this wise
      Upon the prostrate spoil of that poor heart
      That serves, a trophy to her conquering eyes,
      And must their glory to the world impart;
    Once let her know sh'hath done enough to prove me,
    And let her pity if she cannot love me!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Tears, vows and prayers gain the hardest hearts,
      Tears, vows and prayers have I spent in vain;
      Tears cannot soften flint nor vows convert;
      Prayers prevail not with a quaint disdain.
    I lose my tears where I have lost my love,
      I vow my faith where faith is not regarded,
      I pray in vain a merciless to move;
      So rare a faith ought better be rewarded.
    Yet though I cannot win her will with tears,
      Though my soul's idol scorneth all my vows,
      Though all my prayers be to so deaf ears,
      No favour though the cruel Fair allows,
    Yet will I weep, vow, pray to cruel she;
    Flint, frost, disdain, wears, melts and yields, we see.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    My spotless love hovers with purest wings
      About the temple of the proudest frame,
      Where blaze those lights, fairest of earthly things;
      Which clear our clouded world with brightest flame.
    M'ambitious thoughts, confined in her face,
      Affect no honour but what she can give;
      My hopes do rest in limits of her grace;
      I weigh no comfort unless she relieve.
    For she that can my heart imparadise,
      Holds in her fairest hand what dearest is.
      My fortune's wheel's the circle of her eyes,
      Whose rolling grace deign once a turn of bliss.
    All my life's sweet consists in her alone,
    So much I love the most unloving one.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Behold what hap Pygmalion had to frame
      And carve his proper grief upon a stone!
      My heavy fortune is much like the same;
      I work on flint and that's the cause I moan.
    For hapless lo, even with mine own desires
      I figured on the table of my heart
      The fairest form that the world's eye admires,
      And so did perish by my proper art.
    And still I toil to change the marble breast
      Of her whose sweetest grace I do adore,
      Yet cannot find her breathe unto my rest.
      Hard is her heart, and woe is me therefore.
    O happy he that joyed his stone and art!
    Unhappy I, to love a stony heart!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Those snary locks are those same nets, my dear,
      Wherewith my liberty thou didst surprise
      Love was the flame that fired me so near,
      The dart transpiercing were those crystal eyes.
    Strong is the net, and fervent is the flame;
      Deep is the wound my sighs can well report.
      Yet I do love, adore, and praise the same,
      That holds, that burns, that wounds in this sort;
    And list not seek to break, to quench, to heal,
      The bond, the flame, the wound that festereth so,
      By knife, by liquor, or by salve to deal;
      So much I please to perish in my woe.
    Yet lest long travails be above my strength,
    Good Delia, loose, quench, heal me, now at length!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If that a loyal heart and faith unfeigned,
      If a sweet languish with a chaste desire,
      If hunger-starven thoughts so long retained,
      Fed but with smoke, and cherished but with fire;
    And if a brow with care's characters painted
      Bewray my love with broken words half spoken
      To her which sits in my thoughts' temple sainted,
      And lays to view my vulture-gnawn heart open;
    If I have done due homage to her eyes,
      And had my sighs still tending on her name,
      If on her love my life and honour lies,
      And she, th'unkindest maid, still scorns the same;
    Let this suffice, that all the world may see
    The fault is hers, though mine the hurt must be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Happy in sleep, waking content to languish,
      Embracing clouds by night, in daytime mourn,
      My joys but shadows, touch of truth my anguish,
      Griefs ever springing, comforts never born;
    And still expecting when she will relent,
      Grown hoarse with crying, "mercy, mercy give,"
      So many vows and prayers having spent
      That weary of my life I loathe to live;
    And yet the hydra of my cares renews
      Still new-born sorrows of her fresh disdain;
      And still my hope the summer winds pursues,
      Finding no end nor period of my pain;
    This is my state, my griefs do touch so nearly,
    And thus I live because I love her dearly.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Why should I sing in verse? Why should I frame
      These sad neglected notes for her dear sake?
      Why should I offer up unto her name,
      The sweetest sacrifice my youth can make?
    Why should I strive to make her live for ever,
      That never deigns to give me joy to live?
      Why should m'afflicted Muse so much endeavour
      Such honour unto cruelty to give?
    If her defects have purchased her this fame,
      What should her virtues do, her smiles, her love?
      If this her worst, how should her best inflame?
      What passions would her milder favours move?
    Favours, I think, would sense quite overcome;
    And that makes happy lovers ever dumb.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Since the first look that led me to this error,
      To this thoughts' maze to my confusion tending,
      Still have I lived in grief, in hope, in terror,
      The circle of my sorrows never ending;
    Yet cannot leave her love that holds me hateful;
      Her eyes exact it, though her heart disdains me.
      See what reward he hath that serves th'ungrateful?
      So true and loyal love no favour gains me.
    Still must I whet my young desires abated,
      Upon the flint of such a heart rebelling;
      And all in vain; her pride is so innated,
      She yields no place at all for pity's dwelling.
    Oft have I told her that my soul did love her,
    And that with tears; yet all this will not move her.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Restore thy tresses to the golden ore,
      Yield Cytherea's son those arks of love;
      Bequeath the heavens the stars that I adore,
      And to the orient do thy pearls remove;
    Yield thy hands' pride unto the ivory white;
      T'Arabian odours give thy breathing sweet;
      Restore thy blush unto Aurora bright;
      To Thetis give the honour of thy feet.
    Let Venus have the graces she resigned,
      And thy sweet voice give back unto the spheres;
      But yet restore thy fierce and cruel mind
      To Hyrcan tigers and to ruthless bears;
    Yield to the marble thy hard heart again;
    So shalt thou cease to plague, and I to pain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    What it is to breathe and live without life;
      How to be pale with anguish, red with fear,
      T'have peace abroad, and nought within but strife:
      Wish to be present, and yet shun t'appear;
    How to be bold far off, and bashful near;
      How to think much, and have no words to speak;
      To crave redress, yet hold affliction dear;
      To have affection strong, a body weak,
    Never to find, yet evermore to seek;
      And seek that which I dare not hope to find;
      T'affect this life and yet this life disleek,
      Grateful t'another, to myself unkind:
    This cruel knowledge of these contraries,
    Delia, my heart hath learned out of those eyes.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If beauty thus be clouded with a frown,
      That pity shines no comfort to my bliss,
      And vapours of disdain so overgrown,
      That my life's light wholly indarkened is,
    Why should I more molest the world with cries,
      The air with sighs, the earth below with tears,
      Since I live hateful to those ruthful eyes,
      Vexing with untuned moan her dainty ears!
    If I have loved her dearer than my breath,
      My breath that calls the heaven to witness it!--
      And still hold her most dear until my death,
      And if that all this cannot move one whit,
    Yet sure she cannot but must think apart
    She doth me wrong to grieve so true a heart.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Come Time, the anchor hold of my desire,
      My last resort whereto my hopes appeal;
      Cause once the date of her disdain t'exspire,
      Make her the sentence of her wrath repeal.
    Rob her fair brow, break in on beauty, steal
      Power from those eyes which pity cannot spare;
      Deal with those dainty cheeks, as she doth deal
      With this poor heart consumed with despair.
    This heart made now the prospective of care
      By loving her, the cruelst fair that lives,
      The cruelst fair that sees I pine for her,
      And never mercy to thy merit gives.
    Let her not still triumph over the prize
    Of mine affections taken by her eyes.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Time, cruel Time, come and subdue that brow
      Which conquers all but thee, and thee too stays,
      As if she were exempt from scythe or bow,
      From love or years unsubject to decays.
    Or art thou grown in league with those fair eyes,
      That they may help thee to consume our days?
      Or dost thou spare her for her cruelties,
      Being merciless like thee that no man weighs?
    And yet thou seest thy power she disobeys,
      Cares not for thee, but lets thee waste in vain,
      And prodigal of hours and years betrays
      Beauty and youth t'opinion and disdain.
    Yet spare her, Time; let her exempted be;
    She may become more kind to thee or me.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    These sorrowing sighs, the smoke of mine annoy,
      These tears, which heat of sacred flame distils,
      Are those due tributes that my faith doth pay
      Unto the tyrant whose unkindness kills.
    I sacrifice my youth and blooming years
      At her proud feet, and she respects not it;
      My flower, untimely's withered with my tears,
      By winter woes for spring of youth unfit.
    She thinks a look may recompense my care,
      And so with looks prolongs my long-looked ease;
      As short that bliss, so is the comfort rare;
      Yet must that bliss my hungry thoughts appease.
    Thus she returns my hopes so fruitless ever;
    Once let her love indeed, or eye me never!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    False hope prolongs my ever certain grief,
      Traitor to me, and faithful to my love.
      A thousand times it promised me relief,
      Yet never any true effect I prove.
    Oft when I find in her no truth at all,
      I banish her, and blame her treachery;
      Yet soon again I must her back recall,
      As one that dies without her company.
    Thus often, as I chase my hope from me,
      Straightway she hastes her unto Delia's eyes;
      Fed with some pleasing look, there shall she be,
      And so sent back. And thus my fortune lies;
    Looks feed my hope, hope fosters me in vain;
    Hopes are unsure when certain is my pain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Look in my griefs, and blame me not to mourn,
      From care to care that leads a life so bad;
      Th'orphan of fortune, born to be her scorn,
      Whose clouded brow doth make my days so sad.
    Long are their nights whose cares do never sleep,
      Loathsome their days who never sun yet joyed;
      The impression of her eyes do pierce so deep,
      That thus I live both day and night annoyed.
    Yet since the sweetest root yields fruit so sour,
      Her praise from my complaint I may not part;
      I love th'effect, the cause being of this power;
      I'll praise her face and blame her flinty heart,
    Whilst we both make the world admire at us,
    Her for disdain, and me for loving thus.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Reignin my thoughts, fair hand, sweet eye, rare voice!
      Possess me whole, my heart's triumvirate!
      Yet heavy heart, to make so hard a choice
      Of such as spoil thy poor afflicted state!
    For whilst they strive which shall be lord of all,
      All my poor life by them is trodden down;
      They all erect their trophies on my fall,
      And yield me nought that gives them their renown.
    When back I look, I sigh my freedom past,
      And wail the state wherein I present stand,
      And see my fortune ever like to last,
      Finding me reined with such a heavy hand.
    What can I do but yield? and yield I do;
    And serve all three, and yet they spoil me too!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Whilst by thy eyes pursued, my poor heart flew
      Into the sacred refuge of thy breast;
      Thy rigour in that sanctuary slew
      That which thy succ'ring mercy should have blest.
    No privilege of faith could it protect,
      Faith being with blood and five years witness signed,
      Wherein no show gave cause of least suspect,
      For well thou saw'st my love and how I pined.
    Yet no mild comfort would thy brow reveal,
      No lightning looks which falling hopes erect;
      What boots to laws of succour to appeal?
      Ladies and tyrants never laws respect.
    Then there I die from whence my life should come,
    And by that hand whom such deeds ill become.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Still in the trace of one perplexed thought,
      My ceaseless cares continually run on,
      Seeking in vain what I have ever sought,
      One in my love, and her hard heart still one.
    I who did never joy in other sun,
      And have no stars but those that must fulfil
      The work of rigour, fatally begun
      Upon this heart whom cruelty will kill,
    Injurious Delia!--yet, I love thee still,
      And will whilst I shall draw this breath of mine;
      I'll tell the world that I deserved but ill,
      And blame myself, t'excuse that heart of thine;
    See then who sins the greater of us twain,
    I in my love, or thou in thy disdain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Oft do I marvel whether Delia's eyes
      Are eyes, or else two radiant stars that shine;
      For how could nature ever thus devise
      Of earth, on earth, a substance so divine?
    Stars, sure, they are, whose motions rule desires,
      And calm and tempest follow their aspects;
      Their sweet appearing still such power inspires,
      That makes the world admire so strange effects.
    Yet whether fixed or wandering stars are they,
      Whose influence rules the orb of my poor heart;
      Fixed, sure, they are, but wandering make me stray
      In endless errors whence I cannot part.
    Stars, then, not eyes, move you with milder view
    Your sweet aspect on him that honours you!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    The star of my mishap imposed this pain
      To spend the April of my years in grief;
      Finding my fortune ever in the wane,
      With still fresh cares, supplied with no relief.
    Yet thee I blame not, though for thee 'tis done;
      But these weak wings presuming to aspire,
      Which now are melted by thine eyes' bright sun
      That makes me fall from off my high desire;
    And in my fall I cry for help with speed,
      No pitying eye looks back upon my fears;
      No succour find I now when most I need:
      My heats must drown in th'ocean of my tears,
    Which still must bear the title of my wrong,
    Caused by those cruel beams that were so strong.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    And yet I cannot reprehend the flight,
      Or blame th'attempt, presuming so to soar;
      The mounting venture for a high delight
      Did make the honour of the fall the more.
    For who gets wealth, that puts not from the shore?
      Danger hath honours, great designs their fame,
      Glory doth follow, courage goes before;
      And though th'event oft answers not the same,
    Suffice that high attempts have never shame.
      The mean observer whom base safety keeps,
      Lives without honour, dies without a name,
      And in eternal darkness ever sleeps.
    And therefore, Delia, 'tis to me no blot
    To have attempted though attained thee not.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c c

    Raising my hopes on hills of high desire,
      Thinking to scale the heaven of her heart,
      My slender means presumed too high a part,
    Her thunder of disdain forced me retire,
    And threw me down to pain in all this fire,
      Where lo, I languish in so heavy smart
      Because th'attempt was far above my art;
    Her pride brooked not poor souls should come so nigh her.
    Yet, I protest, my high desiring will
      Was not to dispossess her of her right;
      Her sovereignty should have remained still;
      I only sought the bliss to have her sight.
    Her sight, contented thus to see me spill,
    Framed my desires fit for her eyes to kill.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Why dost thou, Delia, credit so thy glass,
      Gazing thy beauty deigned thee by the skies,
      And dost not rather look on him, alas!
      Whose state best shows the force of murdering eyes?
    The broken tops of lofty trees declare
      The fury of a mercy-wanting storm;
      And of what force thy wounding graces are
      Upon myself, you best may find the form.
    Then leave thy glass, and gaze thyself on me;
      That mirror shows what power is in thy face;
      To view your form too much may danger be,
      Narcissus changed t'a flower in such a case.
    And you are changed, but not t'a hyacinth;
    I fear your eye hath turned your heart to flint.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d

    I once may see when years shall wreck my wrong,
      And golden hairs shall change to silver wire,
      And those bright rays that kindle all this fire,
    Shall fail in force, their working not so strong,
    Then beauty, now the burden of my song,
      Whose glorious blaze the world doth so admire,
      Must yield up all to tyrant Time's desire;
    Then fade those flowers that decked her pride so long.
    When if she grieve to gaze her in her glass,
      Which then presents her whiter-withered hue,
    Go you, my verse, go tell her what she was,
      For what she was, she best shall find in you.
      Your fiery heat lets not her glory pass,
      But phoenix-like shall make her live anew.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Look, Delia, how w'esteem the half-blown rose,
      The image of thy blush, and summer's honour,
      Whilst yet her tender bud doth undisclose
      That full of beauty time bestows upon her.
    No sooner spreads her glory in the air,
      But straight her wide-blown pomp comes to decline;
      She then is scorned that late adorned the fair;
      So fade the roses of those cheeks of thine.
    No April can revive thy withered flowers,
      Whose springing grace adorns thy glory now;
      Swift speedy time, feathered with flying hours,
      Dissolves the beauty of the fairest brow.
    Then do not thou such treasure waste in vain,
    But love now whilst thou mayst be loved again.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    But love whilst that thou mayst be loved again,
      Now whilst thy May hath filled thy lap with flowers,
      Now whilst thy beauty bears without a stain,
      Now use thy summer smiles, ere winter lowers.
    And whilst thou spread'st unto the rising sun,
      The fairest flower that ever saw the light,
      Now joy thy time before thy sweet be done;
      And, Delia, think thy morning must have night,
    And that thy brightness sets at length to west,
      When thou wilt close up that which now thou showest,
      And think the same becomes thy fading best,
      Which then shall most inveil and shadow most.
    Men do not weigh the stalk for that it was,
    When once they find her flower, her glory pass.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    When men shall find thy flower, thy glory pass,
      And thou with careful brow sitting alone
      Received hast this message from thy glass
      That tells the truth, and says that all is gone;
    Fresh shalt thou see in me the wounds thou mad'st,
      Though spent thy flame, in me the heat remaining.
      I that have loved thee thus before thou fad'st,
      My faith shall wax when thou art in thy waning.
    The world shall find this miracle in me,
      That fire can burn when all the matter's spent;
      Then what my faith hath been thyself shalt see,
      And that thou wast unkind thou mayst repent.
    Thou mayst repent that thou hast scorned my tears,
    When winter snows upon thy sable hairs.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    When winter snows upon thy sable hairs,
      And frost of age hath nipped thy beauties near,
      When dark shall seem thy day that never clears,
      And all lies withered that was held so dear;
    Then take this picture which I here present thee,
      Limned with a pencil not all unworthy;
      Here see the gifts that God and nature lent thee,
      Here read thyself and what I suffered for thee.
    This may remain thy lasting monument,
      Which happily posterity may cherish;
      These colours with thy fading are not spent,
      These may remain when thou and I shall perish.
    If they remain, then thou shalt live thereby;
    They will remain, and so thou canst not die.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Thou canst not die whilst any zeal abound
      In feeling hearts than can conceive these lines;
      Though thou a Laura hast no Petrarch found,
      In base attire yet clearly beauty shines.
    And I though born within a colder clime,
      Do feel mine inward heat as great--I know it;
      He never had more faith, although more rhyme;
      I love as well though he could better show it.
    But I may add one feather to thy fame,
      To help her flight throughout the fairest isle;
      And if my pen could more enlarge thy name,
      Then shouldst thou live in an immortal style.
    For though that Laura better limned be,
    Suffice, thou shalt be loved as well as she!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Be not displeased that these my papers should
      Bewray unto the world how fair thou art;
      Or that my wits have showed the best they could
      The chastest flame that ever warmed heart.
    Think not, sweet Delia, this shall be thy shame,
      My muse should sound thy praise with mournful warble.
      How many live, the glory of whose name
      Shall rest in ice, while thine is graved in marble!
    Thou mayst in after ages live esteemed,
      Unburied in these lines, reserved in pureness;
      These shall entomb those eyes, that have redeemed
      Me from the vulgar, thee from all obscureness.
    Although my careful accents never moved thee,
    Yet count it no disgrace that I loved thee.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Delia, these eyes that so admireth thine,
      Have seen those walls which proud ambition reared
      To check the world, how they entombed have lain
      Within themselves, and on them ploughs have eared;
    Yet never found that barbarous hand attained
      The spoil of fame deserved by virtuous men,
      Whose glorious actions luckily had gained
      Th'eternal annals of a happy pen.
    And therefore grieve not if thy beauties die
      Though time do spoil thee of the fairest veil
      That ever yet covered mortality,
      And must instar the needle and the rail.
    That grace which doth more than inwoman thee,
    Lives in my lines and must eternal be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Most fair and lovely maid, look from the shore,
      See thy Leander striving in these waves,
      Poor soul quite spent, whose force can do no more.
      Now send forth hope, for now calm pity saves,
    And waft him to thee with those lovely eyes,
      A happy convoy to a holy land.
      Now show thy power, and where thy virtue lies;
      To save thine own, stretch out the fairest hand.
    Stretch out the fairest hand, a pledge of peace,
      That hand that darts so right and never misses;
      I shall forget old wrongs, my griefs shall cease;
      And that which gave me wounds, I'll give it kisses.
    Once let the ocean of my care find shore,
    That thou be pleased, and I may sigh no more.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Read in my face a volume of despairs,
      The wailing Iliads of my tragic woe;
      Drawn with my blood, and painted with my cares,
      Wrought by her hand that I have honoured so.
    Who whilst I burn, she sings at my soul's wrack,
      Looking aloft from turret of her pride;
      There my soul's tyrant joys her in the sack
      Of her own seat, whereof I made her guide.
    There do these smokes that from affliction rise,
      Serve as an incense to a cruel dame;
      A sacrifice thrice-grateful to her eyes,
      Because their power serves to exact the same.
    Thus ruins she to satisfy her will,
    The temple where her name was honoured still.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    My Delia hath the waters of mine eyes,
      The ready handmaids on her grace t'attend,
      That never fail to ebb, but ever rise;
      For to their flow she never grants an end.
    The ocean never did attend more duly
      Upon his sovereign's course, the night's pale queen,
      Nor paid the impost of his waves more truly,
      Than mine unto her cruelty hath been.
    Yet nought the rock of that hard heart can move,
      Where beat these tears with zeal, and fury drives;
      And yet, I'd rather languish in her love,
      Than I would joy the fairest she that lives.
    And if I find such pleasure to complain,
    What should I do then if I should obtain?

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    How long shall I in mine affliction mourn,
      A burden to myself, distressed in mind;
      When shall my interdicted hopes return
      From out despair wherein they live confined?
    When shall her troubled brow charged with disdain
      Reveal the treasure which her smiles impart?
      When shall my faith the happiness attain,
      To break the ice that hath congealed her heart?
    Unto herself, herself my love doth summon,
      (If love in her hath any power to move)
      And let her tell me, as she is a woman,
      Whether my faith hath not deserved her love?
    I know her heart cannot but judge with me,
    Although her eyes my adversaries be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Beauty, sweet love, is like the morning dew,
      Whose short refresh upon the tender green
      Cheers for a time but till the sun doth show,
      And straight 'tis gone as it had never been.
    Soon doth it fade that makes the fairest flourish,
      Short is the glory of the blushing rose,
      The hue which thou so carefully dost nourish,
      Yet which at length thou must be forced to lose.
    When thou, surcharged with burden of thy years,
      Shalt bend thy wrinkles homeward to the earth,
      And that in beauty's lease expired appears
      The date of age, the kalends of our death,--
    But ah! no more, this must not be foretold,
    For women grieve to think they must be old.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    I must not grieve my love, whose eyes would read
      Lines of delight, whereon her youth might smile;
      Flowers have a time before they come to seed,
      And she is young, and now must sport the while.
    Ah sport, sweet maid, in season of these years,
      And learn to gather flowers before they wither.
      And where the sweetest blossoms first appears,
      Let love and youth conduct thy pleasures thither.
    Lighten forth smiles to clear the clouded air,
      And calm the tempest which my sighs do raise;
      Pity and smiles do best become the fair,
      Pity and smiles shall yield thee lasting praise.
    Make me to say, when all my griefs are gone,
    Happy the heart that sighed for such a one!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Ah whither, poor forsaken, wilt thou go,
      To go from sorrow and thine own distress,
      When every place presents like face of woe,
      And no remove can make thy sorrows less!
    Yet go, forsaken! Leave these woods, these plains,
      Leave her and all, and all for her that leaves
      Thee and thy love forlorn, and both disdains,
      And of both wrongful deems and ill conceives.
    Seek out some place, and see if any place
      Can give the least release unto thy grief;
      Convey thee from the thought of thy disgrace,
      Steal from thyself and be thy cares' own thief.
    But yet what comforts shall I hereby gain?
    Bearing the wound, I needs must feel the pain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Drawn with th'attractive virtue of her eyes,
      My touched heart turns it to that happy coast,
      My joyful north, where all my fortune lies,
      The level of my hopes desired most;
    There where my Delia, fairer than the sun,
      Decked with her youth whereon the world doth smile,
      Joys in that honour which her eyes have won,
      Th'eternal wonder of our happy isle.
    Flourish, fair Albion, glory of the north!
      Neptune's best darling, held between his arms;
      Divided from the world as better worth,
      Kept for himself, defended from all harms!
    Still let disarmed peace deck her and thee;
    And Muse-foe Mars abroad far fostered be!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Care-charmer sleep, son of the sable night,
      Brother to death, in silent darkness born,
      Relieve my languish, and restore the light;
      With dark forgetting of my care return,
    And let the day be time enough to mourn
      The shipwreck of my ill-adventured youth;
      Let waking eyes suffice to wail their scorn,
      Without the torment of the night's untruth.
    Cease, dreams, the images of day-desires,
      To model forth the passions of the morrow;
      Never let rising sun approve you liars,
      To add more grief to aggravate my sorrow;
    Still let me sleep, embracing clouds in vain,
    And never wake to feel the day's disdain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Let others sing of knights and paladins,
      In aged accents and untimely words,
      Paint shadows in imaginary lines
      Which well the reach of their high wits records;
    But I must sing of thee and those fair eyes
      Authentic shall my verse in time to come,
      When yet th'unborn shall say, Lo, where she lies,
      Whose beauty made him speak that else was dumb!
    These are the arks, the trophies I erect,
      That fortify thy name against old age;
      And these thy sacred virtues must protect
      Against the dark and time's consuming rage.
    Though th'error of my youth in them appear,
    Suffice, they show I lived and loved thee, dear.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    As to the Roman that would free his land,
      His error was his honour and renown;
      And more the fame of his mistaking hand
      Than if he had the tyrant overthrown.
    So Delia, hath mine error made me known,
      And my deceived attempt deserved more fame,
      Than if had the victory mine own,
      And thy hard heart had yielded up the same.
    And so likewise renowned is thy blame;
      Thy cruelty, thy glory; O strange case,
      That errors should be graced that merit shame,
      And sin of frowns bring honour to the face.
    Yet happy Delia that thou wast unkind,
    Though happier far, if thou would'st change thy mind.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Like as the lute delights or else dislikes
      As is his art that plays upon the same,
      So sounds my Muse according as she strikes
      On my heart-strings high tuned unto her fame.
    Her touch doth cause the warble of the sound,
      Which here I yield in lamentable wise,
      A wailing descant on the sweetest ground,
      Whose due reports give honour to her eyes;
    Else harsh my style, untunable my Muse;
      Hoarse sounds the voice that praiseth not her name;
      If any pleasing relish here I use,
      Then judge the world her beauty gives the same.
    For no ground else could make the music such,
    Nor other hand could give so sweet a touch.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    None other fame mine unambitious Muse
      Affected ever but t'eternise thee;
      All other honours do my hopes refuse,
      Which meaner prized and momentary be.
    For God forbid I should my papers blot
      With mercenary lines with servile pen,
      Praising virtues in them that have them not,
      Basely attending on the hopes of men.
    No, no, my verse respects not Thames, nor theatres;
      Nor seeks it to be known unto the great;
      But Avon, poor in fame, and poor in waters,
      Shall have my song, where Delia hath her seat.
    Avon shall be my Thames, and she my song;
    No other prouder brooks shall hear my wrong.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Unhappy pen, and ill-accepted lines
      That intimate in vain my chaste desire,
      My chaste desire, which from dark sorrow shines,
      Enkindled by her eyes' celestial fire;
    Celestial fire, and unrespecting powers
      Which pity not the wounds made by their might,
      Showed in these lines, the work of careful hours,
      The sacrifice here offered to her sight.
    But since she weighs them not, this rests for me:
      I'll moan myself, and hide the wrong I have,
      And so content me that her frowns should be
      To m'infant style the cradle and the grave.
    What though my Muse no honour get thereby;
    Each bird sings to herself, and so will I.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Lo here the impost of a faith entire,
      That love doth pay, and her disdain extorts;
      Behold the message of a chaste desire
      That tells the world how much my grief imports.
    These tributary passions, beauty's due,
      I send those eyes, the cabinets of love;
      That cruelty herself might grieve to view
      Th'affliction her unkind disdain doth move.
    And how I live, cast down from off all mirth,
      Pensive, alone, only but with despair;
      My joys abortive perish in their birth,
      My griefs long-lived and care succeeding care.
    This is my state, and Delia's heart is such;
    I say no more, I fear I said too much.

TITLE Certaine Epistles

RHYME a a b c d b c d

The price of your efteeme t'a. lower rate,
Then doth befit the pitch of your eftate.
Nor may you build on your fufficiencie, 70
For in our ftrongeft parts we are but weake;
Nor yet may ouermuch di(truft the fame :
Left that you come to checke it fo thereby,
As filence may become worfe then to fpeake;
Though filence women neuer ill became.

RHYME a a b c d b c d

And none we fee were euer ouerthrowne
By others flattery more then by their owne.
For though we Hue amongft the tongues of praife,
And troopes of fmoothing people that collaud
All that we doe, yet 'tis within our harts 80
Th'ambufhment lies, that euermore betraies
Our iudgements, when our felues be come t'applaud
Our owne abilitie and our owne parts.

RHYME a b c a b c d d 

Such are your holy bounds, who muft conuay 90
(If God fo pleafe) the honourable bloud
Of Clifford, and of Ruffcll, led aright
To many worthy ftems ; whofe ofspring may
Looke backe with comfort, to haue had that good
To fpring from fuch a branch that grew f vpright;
Since nothing cheeres the heart of greatnelfe more
Then th'Anceftors faire glory gone before. 97

RHYME a b a b a b

Gath'ring, incroching, wrefting, ioyning to,
Deftroying, building, decking, furnifhing,
Repayring, altring, and fo much adoe,
To his foules toyle, and bodies trauelling :
And all this doth he, little knowing who
Fortune ordaines to haue th'inheriting. 

RHYME a b a b a b

And his faire houfe raif'd hie in Enuies eie ;
Whofe Pillars rear'd (perhaps) on bloud and wrong,
The fpoyles and pillage of Iniquitie:
Who can affure it to continue long ? 120
If Rage fpar'd not the walles of Pietie,
Shall the prophaneft pyles of finne keepe ftrong ? 

RHYME a b a b a b

How many proud afpiring Pallaces
Haue we knowne, made the prey of wrath and pride;
Leuell'd with th'earth, left to forgetfulneffe ;
Whilft titlers their pretended rights decide,
Or ciuill tumults, or an orderleffe
Order, pretending change of fome ftrong fide ? 

RHYME a b a b a b

Then where is that proud Title of thy name,
Written in yce of melting vanitie ? 130
Where is thine heire left to poffeffe the fame ?
Perhaps, not fo well as in beggarie.
Something may rife to be beyond the fhame
Of vile and vnregarded Pouertie. 

RHYME a b a b a b

Which I confeffe, although I often ftriue
To clothe in the beft habit of my fkill,
In all the faireft colours I can giue :
Yet for all that, me thinkes fhe lookes but ill.
I cannot brooke that face, which dead-aliue
Shewes a quicke body, but a buried will. 140

RHYME a b a b a b

Yet oft we fee the barres of this reftraint
Holdes goodneffe in, which loofe wealth would let die;
And fruitleffe riches barriner then want,
Brings forth fmall worth from idle Libertie:
Which when Diforders fhall againe make scant.
It muft refetch her ftate from Pouertie.

RHYME a b a b a b

But yet in all this interchange of all,
Vertue we fee, with her faire grace, ftands faft 
: For what high races hath there come to fall, 
\ With low difgrace, quite vanifhed and paft
Since Chaucer liu'd ; who yet liues, and yet fhall,
Though (which I grieue to fay) but in his laft.

RHYME a b a b a b

Yet what a time hath he wrefted from Time,
And wonne vpon the mighty wafte of dayes,
Vnto th'immortall honour of our clime !
That by his meanes came firft adorn'd with Bayes ;
Vnto the facred Relickes of whofe rime.
We yet are bound in zeale to offer praife ?

RHYME a b a b a b

And, could our lines, begotten in this age,
Obtaine but fuch a bleffed hand of yeares, 160
And fcape the fury of that threatning rage,
Which in confufed cloudes gaftly appeares ;
Who would not ftraine his trauels to ingage,
When fuch true glory fhould fucceede his cares ?

RHYME a b a b a b

But whereas he came planted in the Spring,
And had the Sunne, before him, of Refpeft:
We, fet in th'Autumne, in the withering
And fullen feafon of a cold defect,
Muft tafte thofe fowre diftafts the times do bring
Vpon the fulneffe of a cloy'd Neglect; 170

RHYME a b a b

Although the ftronger conftitutions fhall
Weare out th'infection of diftempred dayes,
And come with glory to out-liue this fall :
Recou'ring of another fpringing of Praife,

RHYME a b a b a b

And therefore doe make not your owne fides bleed
To pricke at others : you that would amend 750
By pulling downe, and thinke you can proceed,
By going backe vnto the farther end,
Let ftand that little Couert left behinde,
Whereon your fuccours and refpects depend.

RHYME a b a b a b

And bring not downe the prizes of the minde,
With vnder-rating of your felues fo bafe :
You that the mighties doores doe crooching find,
To fell your felues to buy a little grace,
Or waite whole months to out-bid Symonie,
For that, which being got, is not your place : 760

RHYME a b a b a b

For if it were, what needed you to buy
What was your due; your thirfting fhewes your fhift.
And little worth that feekes iniurioufly
A worthier from his lawfull roome to lift ?
We cannot fay, that you were then prefer'd,
But that your money was, or fome worfe gift.

RHYME a b a b c b

O fcattring gath'rers, that without regard
Of times to come, will to be made, vndo
As if you were the laft of men, prepar'd
To bury in your graues all other to. 770
Dare you prophane that holy portion
Which neuer facrilegious hand durft do ?

RHYME a b a b c b

Did forme-eftablifhing Deuotion,
To maintaine a refpeftiue reuerence
Extend her bountifull prouifion,
With fuch a charitable prouidence,
For your deforming hands to diffipate,
And make Gods due, your impious expence ?

RHYME a b a b c b

No maruell then, though th'ouerpeftred State
Want roome for goodnefle, if our little hold 780
Be lefned vnto fuch a narrow rate,
That Reuerence cannot fit, fit as it mould :
And yet what neede we thus for roomes complaine,
That mail not want voyde roomes if this courfe hold?

RHYME a b a b c b c d c d e d e

And more then will be fill'd ; for who will ftraine
To get an empty title, to betray
His hopes, and trauell for an honour vaine,
And gaine a Port, without fupport or ftay ?
What neede hath Enuy to maligne their ftate,
That will themfelues, fo kind, giue it away ? 790
This makes indeede our number pafle the rate
Of our prouifions : which, if dealt aright,
Would yeeld fufficient roome t'accommodate,
More then we haue in places requifite.
The ill difpofing onely doth vs fet
In difaray, and out of order quite.
Whiles other guifts then of the minde fhall get

RHYME a b a c a c d c d e d e

Vnder our colours, that which is our dues,
And to our trauels, neither benefit,
Nor grace, nor honour, nor refpect accrewes : 800
The fickneffe of the States foule, Learning, then
The bodies great diftemprature infues.
For if that Learnings roomes to learned men
Were as their heretage diftributed,
All this difordred thruft would ceafe : for when
The fit were call'd, th'vnworthy fruftrated,
Thefe would b'afham'd to feeke, thofe to b'vnfought,
And ftay'ng their turne, were fure they fhould be fped.
Then would our drooping Academies, brought

RHYME a b b c b d d e f e g g

Th'Elixer that our leaden Parts conuart
Into the golden Metall of the Minde.
Who thus obferues in fuch materiall kinde
The certaine Motions of hie Practifes, IO
Knowes on what Center th'A&ions of Mankinde
Turne in their courfe, and fees their fatalnes. __
And hee that can make thefe obferuances,
Muft be aboue his Booke, more then his Pen.
For, wee may be aflur'd, hee men can ghefle,
That thus doth Cesar knowe ; the Man of men.
Whofe Work, improu'd here to our greater gaine,
Makes C/esar more then C/esar to containe. 


RHYME a a *

  In days of old, there lived, of mighty fame,
  A valiant prince, and Theseus was his name:
  A chief, who more in feats of arms excell'd,
  The rising nor the setting sun beheld.
  Of Athens he was lord; much land he won,
  And added foreign countries to his crown.
  In Scythia with the warrior queen he strove,
  Whom first by force he conquer'd, then by love;
  He brought in triumph back the beauteous dame,
  With whom her sister, fair Emilia, came.                  

RHYME a a a

  With honour to his home let Theseus ride,
  With love to friend, and fortune for his guide,
  And his victorious army at his side.

RHYME a a *

  I pass their warlike pomp, their proud array,
  Their shouts, their songs, their welcome on the way.

RHYME a a a
 
 But, were it not too long, I would recite
  The feats of Amazons, the fatal fight
  Betwixt the hardy queen and hero knight;

RHYME a a *

  The town besieged, and how much blood it cost
  The female army, and the Athenian host;                   
  The spousals of Hippolita the queen;
  What tilts and tourneys at the feast were seen;
  The storm at their return, the ladies' fear:
  But these, and other things, I must forbear.
  The field is spacious I design to sow,
  With oxen far unfit to draw the plough:
  The remnant of my tale is of a length
  To tire your patience, and to waste my strength;
  And trivial accidents shall be forborne,
  That others may have time to take their turn;             

RHYME a a a

  As was at first enjoin'd us by mine host:
  That he whose tale is best, and pleases most,
  Should win his supper at our common cost.

RHYME a a a

    And therefore where I left, I will pursue
  This ancient story, whether false or true,
  In hope it may be mended with a new.

RHYME a a *

  The prince I mention'd, full of high renown,
  In this array drew near the Athenian town;
  When in his pomp and utmost of his pride,
  Marching he chanced to cast his eye aside,                
  And saw a choir of mourning dames, who lay
  By two and two across the common way:
  At his approach they raised a rueful cry,
  And beat their breasts, and held their hands on high,
  Creeping and crying, till they seized at last
  His courser's bridle, and his feet embraced.
  Tell me, said Theseus, what and whence you are,
  And why this funeral pageant you prepare?
  Is this the welcome of my worthy deeds,
  To meet my triumph in ill-omen'd weeds?                   
  Or envy you my praise, and would destroy
  With grief my pleasures, and pollute my joy?
  Or are you injured, and demand relief?
  Name your request, and I will ease your grief.

RHYME a a *

    The most in years of all the mourning train
  Began; but swooned first away for pain,
  Then scarce recover'd spoke: Nor envy we
  Thy great renown, nor grudge thy victory;
  'Tis thine, O king, the afflicted to redress,
  And fame has fill'd the world with thy success:           
  We wretched women sue for that alone,
  Which of thy goodness is refused to none;
  Let fall some drops of pity on our grief,
  If what we beg be just, and we deserve relief:
  For none of us, who now thy grace implore,
  But held the rank of sovereign queen before;
  Till, thanks to giddy chance, which never bears,
  That mortal bliss should last for length of years,
  She cast us headlong from our high estate,
  And here in hope of thy return we wait:                   
  And long have waited in the temple nigh,
  Built to the gracious goddess Clemency.
  But reverence thou the Power whose name it bears,
  Relieve the oppress'd, and wipe the widow's tears.
  
RHYME a a *

I, wretched I, have other fortune seen,
  The wife of Capaneus, and once a queen:
  At Thebes he fell; cursed be the fatal day!
  And all the rest thou seest in this array,
  To make their moan, their lords in battle lost
  Before that town besieged by our confederate host:        
  But Creon, old and impious, who commands
  The Theban city, and usurps the lands,
  Denies the rites of funeral fires to those
  Whose breathless bodies yet he calls his foes.
  Unburn'd, unburied, on a heap they lie;
  Such is their fate, and such his tyranny;
  No friend has leave to bear away the dead,
  But with their lifeless limbs his hounds are fed.
  At this she shriek'd aloud; the mournful train
  Echoed her grief, and grovelling on the plain,            
  With groans, and hands upheld, to move his mind,
  Besought his pity to their helpless kind!

RHYME a a *

    The prince was touch'd, his tears began to flow,
  And, as his tender heart would break in two,
  He sigh'd, and could not but their fate deplore,
  So wretched now, so fortunate before.
  Then lightly from his lofty steed he flew,
  And, raising one by one the suppliant crew,
  To comfort each full solemnly he swore,
  That by the faith which knights to knighthood bore, 
  And whate'er else to chivalry belongs,
  He would not cease, till he revenged their wrongs:
  That Greece should see perform'd what he declared;
  And cruel Creon find his just reward.

RHYME a a *

  He said no more, but, shunning all delay,
  Rode on; nor enter'd Athens on his way:
  But left his sister and his queen behind,
  And waved his royal banner in the wind:
  Where in an argent field the god of war
  Was drawn triumphant on his iron car;               

RHYME a a *

  Red was his sword, and shield, and whole attire,
  And all the godhead seem'd to glow with fire;
  Even the ground glitter'd where the standard flew,
  And the green grass was dyed to sanguine hue.
  High on his pointed lance his pennon bore
  His Cretan fight, the conquer'd Minotaur:
  The soldiers shout around with generous rage,
  And in that victory their own presage.
  He praised their ardour: inly pleased to see
  His host the flower of Grecian chivalry,            

RHYME a a *

  All day he march'd, and all the ensuing night,
  And saw the city with returning light.
  The process of the war I need not tell,
  How Theseus conquer'd, and how Creon fell:
  Or after, how by storm the walls were won,
  Or how the victor sack'd and burn'd the town:
  How to the ladies he restored again
  The bodies of their lords in battle slain:

RHYME a a *

  And with what ancient rites they were interr'd;
  All these to fitter times shall be deferr'd.        
  I spare the widows' tears, their woeful cries,
  And howling at their husbands' obsequies;
  How Theseus at these funerals did assist,
  And with what gifts the mourning dames dismiss'd.

RHYME a a *

    Thus when the victor chief had Creon slain,
  And conquer'd Thebes, he pitch'd upon the plain
  His mighty camp, and, when the day return'd,
  The country wasted, and the hamlets burn'd,
  And left the pillagers, to rapine bred,
  Without control to strip and spoil the dead.        

RHYME a a *

    There, in a heap of slain, among the rest
  Two youthful knights they found beneath a load oppress'd
  Of slaughter'd foes, whom first to death they sent--
  The trophies of their strength, a bloody monument.
  Both fair, and both of royal blood they seem'd,
  Whom kinsmen to the crown the heralds deem'd;
  That day in equal arms they fought for fame;
  Their swords, their shields, their surcoats were the same.
  Close by each other laid, they press'd the ground,
  Their manly bosoms pierced with many a grisly wound;
  Nor well alive, nor wholly dead they were,
  But some faint signs of feeble life appear:

RHYME a a *

  The wandering breath was on the wing to part,
  Weak was the pulse, and hardly heaved the heart.
  These two were sisters' sons; and Arcite one
  Much famed in fields, with valiant Palamon.
  From these their costly arms the spoilers rent,
  And softly both convey'd to Theseus' tent:
  Whom, known of Creon's line, and cured with care,
  He to his city sent as prisoners of the war,        
  Hopeless of ransom, and condemn'd to lie
  In durance, doom'd a lingering death to die.

RHYME a a a

  This done, he march'd away with warlike sound,
  And to his Athens turn'd, with laurels crown'd,
  Where happy long he lived, much loved, and more renown'd.

RHYME a a *

  But in a tower, and never to be loosed,
  The woful captive kinsmen are enclosed.
    Thus year by year they pass, and day by day,
  Till once, 'twas on the morn of cheerful May,
  The young Emilia, fairer to be seen                 
  Than the fair lily on the flowery green,
  More fresh than May herself in blossoms new,
  For with the rosy colour strove her hue,
  Waked, as her custom was, before the day,
  To do the observance due to sprightly May:
  For sprightly May commands our youth to keep
  The vigils of her night, and breaks their sluggard sleep;
  Each gentle breast with kindly warmth she moves;
  Inspires new flames, revives extinguish'd loves.
  In this remembrance, Emily, ere day,                
  Arose, and dress'd herself in rich array;
  Fresh as the month, and as the morning fair:
  Adown her shoulders fell her length of hair:
  A riband did the braided tresses bind,
  The rest was loose and wanton'd in the wind.
  Aurora had but newly chased the night,
  And purpled o'er the sky with blushing light,

RHYME a a a

  When to the garden walk she took her way,
  To sport and trip along in cool of day,
  And offer maiden vows in honour of the May.         

RHYME a a *

    At every turn, she made a little stand,
  And thrust among the thorns her lily hand
  To draw the rose, and every rose she drew
  She shook the stalk, and brush'd away the dew:
  Then party-colour'd flowers of white and red
  She wove, to make a garland for her head:
  This done, she sung and caroll'd out so clear,
  That men and angels might rejoice to hear:
  Even wondering Philomel forgot to sing;
  And learn'd from her to welcome in the spring.      
  The tower, of which before was mention made,
  Within whose keep the captive knights were laid,
  Built of a large extent, and strong withal,
  Was one partition of the palace wall;
  The garden was enclosed within the square
  Where young Emilia took the morning air.

RHYME a a *

    It happen'd Palamon, the prisoner knight,
  Restless for woe, arose before the light,
  And with his jailer's leave desired to breathe
  An air more wholesome than the damps beneath.       
  This granted, to the tower he took his way,
  Cheer'd with the promise of a glorious day:

RHYME a a a

  Then cast a languishing regard around,
  And saw, with hateful eyes, the temples crown'd
  With golden spires, and all the hostile ground.

RHYME a a *

  He sigh'd, and turn'd his eyes, because he knew
  'Twas but a larger jail he had in view:
  Then look'd below, and from the castle's height
  Beheld a nearer and more pleasing sight:

RHYME a a a

  The garden, which before he had not seen,           
  In spring's new livery clad of white and green,
  Fresh flowers in wide parterres, and shady walks between.

RHYME a a *

  This view'd, but not enjoy'd, with arms across
  He stood, reflecting on his country's loss;
  Himself an object of the public scorn,
  And often wish'd he never had been born.
  At last, for so his destiny required,
  With walking giddy, and with thinking tired,
  He through a little window cast his sight,
  Though thick of bars, that gave a scanty light:     
  But even that glimmering served him to descry
  The inevitable charms of Emily.

RHYME a a *

    Scarce had he seen, but seized with sudden smart,
  Stung to the quick, he felt it at his heart;
  Struck blind with overpowering light he stood,
  Then started back amazed, and cried aloud.

RHYME a a *

    Young Arcite heard; and up he ran with haste,
  To help his friend, and in his arms embraced;
  And ask'd him why he look'd so deadly wan,
  And whence and how his change of cheer began?       
  Or who had done the offence? But if, said he,
  Your grief alone is hard captivity;
  For love of Heaven, with patience undergo
  A cureless ill, since Fate will have it so:
  So stood our horoscope in chains to lie,
  And Saturn in the dungeon of the sky,
  Or other baleful aspect, ruled our birth,
  When all the friendly stars were under earth:
  Whate'er betides, by Destiny 'tis done;
  And better bear like men, than vainly seek to shun. 
  Nor of my bonds, said Palamon again,
  Nor of unhappy planets I complain;
  But when my mortal anguish caused my cry,
  That moment I was hurt through either eye;
 
RHYME a a *

 Pierced with a random shaft, I faint away,
  And perish with insensible decay;
  A glance of some new goddess gave the wound,
  Whom, like Actaeon, unaware I found.

RHYME a a a

  Look how she walks along yon shady space!
  Not Juno moves with more majestic grace;            
  And all the Cyprian queen is in her face.

RHYME a a *

  If thou art Venus (for thy charms confess
  That face was form'd in heaven, nor art thou less
  Disguised in habit, undisguised in shape),
  Oh, help us captives from our chains to 'scape!
  But if our doom be past in bonds to lie
  For life, and in a loathsome dungeon die,
  Then be thy wrath appeased with our disgrace,
  And show compassion to the Theban race,
  Oppress'd by tyrant power! While yet he spoke,      
  Arcite on Emily had fix'd his look;

RHYME a a *

  The fatal dart a ready passage found,
  And deep within his heart infix'd the wound:
  So that if Palamon were wounded sore,
  Arcite was hurt as much as he, or more:
  Then from his inmost soul he sigh'd, and said,
  The beauty I behold has struck me dead:
  Unknowingly she strikes; and kills by chance;
  Poison is in her eyes, and death in every glance.
  Oh, I must ask; nor ask alone, but move             
  Her mind to mercy, or must die for love!
  Thus Arcite: and thus Palamon replies,
  (Eager his tone and ardent were his eyes):

RHYME a a a

  Speak'st thou in earnest, or in jesting vein?
  Jesting, said Arcite, suits but ill with pain.
  It suits far worse (said Palamon again,

RHYME a a *

  And bent his brows) with men who honour weigh,
  Their faith to break, their friendship to betray;
  But worst with thee, of noble lineage born,
  My kinsman, and in arms my brother sworn.           
  Have we not plighted each our holy oath,
  That one should be the common good of both;

RHYME a a *

  One soul should both inspire, and neither prove
  His fellow's hindrance in pursuit of love?
  To this before the gods we gave our hands,
  And nothing but our death can break the bands.
  This binds thee, then, to further my design,
  As I am bound by vow to further thine:
  Nor canst, nor dar'st thou, traitor, on the plain
  Appeach my honour, or thine own maintain,           
  Since thou art of my council, and the friend
  Whose faith I trust, and on whose care depend:
  And would'st thou court my lady's love, which I
  Much rather than release would choose to die?
  But thou, false Arcite, never shall obtain
  Thy bad pretence; I told thee first my pain;
  For first my love began ere thine was born:
  Thou as my council, and my brother sworn,
  Art bound to assist my eldership of right,
  Or justly to be deem'd a perjured knight.           

RHYME a a *

    Thus Palamon: but Arcite with disdain
  In haughty language thus replied again:
  Forsworn thyself: the traitor's odious name
  I first return, and then disprove thy claim.
  If love be passion, and that passion nursed
  With strong desires, I loved the lady first.
  Canst thou pretend desire, whom zeal inflamed
  To worship, and a power celestial named?
  Thine was devotion to the blest above,
  I saw the woman and desired her love;               
  First own'd my passion, and to thee commend
  The important secret, as my chosen friend.
  Suppose (which yet I grant not) thy desire
  A moment elder than my rival fire;
  Can chance of seeing first thy title prove?
  And know'st thou not, no law is made for love?
  Law is to things which to free choice relate;
  Love is not in our choice, but in our fate;

RHYME a a *

  Laws are but positive; love's power, we see,
  Is Nature's sanction, and her first decree.         
  Each day we break the bond of human laws
  For love, and vindicate the common cause.
  Laws for defence of civil rights are placed,
  Love throws the fences down, and makes a general waste;
  Maids, widows, wives, without distinction fall;
  The sweeping deluge, love, comes on, and covers all.

RHYME a a a

  If, then, the laws of friendship I transgress,
  I keep the greater, while I break the less;
  And both are mad alike, since neither can possess.

RHYME a a *

  Both hopeless to be ransom'd, never more            
  To see the sun, but as he passes o'er.
    Like AEsop's hounds contending for the bone,
  Each pleaded right, and would be lord alone:
  The fruitless fight continued all the day;
  A cur came by, and snatch'd the prize away.
  As courtiers, therefore, jostle for a grant,
  And when they break their friendship, plead their want;
  So thou, if fortune will thy suit advance,
  Love on, nor envy me my equal chance;
  For I must love, and am resolved to try             
  My fate, or, failing in the adventure, die.

RHYME a a *

    Great was their strife, which hourly was renew'd,
  Till each with mortal hate his rival view'd;
  Now friends no more, nor walking hand in hand;
  But when they met, they made a surly stand;
  And glared like angry lions as they pass'd,
  And wish'd that every look might be their last.

RHYME a a *

    It chanced at length, Pirithous came to attend
  This worthy Theseus, his familiar friend:
  Their love in early infancy began,                  
  And rose as childhood ripen'd into man.

RHYME a a a

  Companions of the war; and loved so well,
  That when one died, as ancient stories tell,
  His fellow to redeem him went to Hell.

RHYME a a *

    But to pursue my tale; to welcome home
  His warlike brother is Pirithous come:
  Arcite of Thebes was known in arms long since,
  And honour'd by this young Thessalian prince.
  Theseus, to gratify his friend and guest,
  Who made our Arcite's freedom his request,          
  Restored to liberty the captive knight,
  But on these hard conditions I recite:
  That if hereafter Arcite should be found
  Within the compass of Athenian ground,
  By day or night, or on whate'er pretence,
  His head should pay the forfeit of the offence.
  To this Pirithous for his friend agreed,
  And on his promise was the prisoner freed.

RHYME a a *

    Unpleased and pensive hence he takes his way,
  At his own peril; for his life must pay.            
  Who now but Arcite mourns his bitter fate,
  Finds his dear purchase, and repents too late?
  What have I gain'd, he said, in prison pent,
  If I but change my bonds for banishment?
  And banish'd from her sight, I suffer more
  In freedom than I felt in bonds before;
  Forced from her presence, and condemn'd to live:
  Unwelcome freedom, and unthank'd reprieve!
 
RHYME a a *

 Heaven is not, but where Emily abides,
  And where she's absent, all is hell besides.        
  Next to my day of birth, was that accursed,
  Which bound my friendship to Pirithous first:
  Had I not known that prince, I still had been
  In bondage, and had still Emilia seen:
  For though I never can her grace deserve,
  'Tis recompence enough to see and serve.
  O Palamon, my kinsman and my friend,
  How much more happy fates thy love attend!
  Thine is the adventure; thine the victory:
  Well has thy fortune turn'd the dice for thee:      
  Thou on that angel's face may'st feed thine eyes,
  In prison, no; but blissful paradise!
  Thou daily seest that sun of beauty shine,
  And lovest at least in love's extremest line.

RHYME a a a

  I mourn in absence, love's eternal night;
  And who can tell but since thou hast her sight,
  And art a comely, young, and valiant knight,

RHYME a a *

  Fortune (a various power) may cease to frown,
  And by some ways unknown thy wishes crown?
  But I, the most forlorn of human kind,              
  Nor help can hope, nor remedy can find;
  But doom'd to drag my loathsome life in care,
  For my reward, must end it in despair.
  Fire, water, air, and earth, and force of fates,
  That governs all, and Heaven that all creates,
  Nor art, nor nature's hand can ease my grief;
  Nothing but death, the wretch's last relief:
  Then farewell youth, and all the joys that dwell,
  With youth and life, and life itself farewell!

RHYME a a *

    But why, alas! do mortal men in vain              
  Of fortune, fate, or Providence complain?
  God gives us what he knows our wants require,
  And better things than those which we desire:
  Some pray for riches; riches they obtain;
  But, watch'd by robbers, for their wealth are slain:
  Some pray from prison to be freed; and come,
  When guilty of their vows, to fall at home;
  Murder'd by those they trusted with their life,
  A favour'd servant, or a bosom wife.

RHYME a a *

  Such dear-bought blessings happen every day,        
  Because we know not for what things to pray.
  Like drunken sots about the street we roam;
  Well knows the sot he has a certain home;
  Yet knows not how to find the uncertain place,
  And blunders on, and staggers every pace.
  Thus all seek happiness; but few can find.
  For far the greater part of men are blind.
  This is my case, who thought our utmost good
  Was in one word of freedom understood:
  The fatal blessing came: from prison free,          
  I starve abroad, and lose the sight of Emily.

RHYME a a *

    Thus Arcite; but if Arcite thus deplore
  His sufferings, Palamon yet suffers more.
  For when he knew his rival freed and gone,
  He swells with wrath; he makes outrageous moan:
  He frets, he fumes, he stares, he stamps the ground;
  The hollow tower with clamours rings around:
  With briny tears he bathed his fetter'd feet,
  And dropp'd all o'er with agony of sweat.
  Alas! he cried, I wretch in prison pine,            
  Too happy rival, while the fruit is thine:

RHYME a a *

  Thou livest at large, thou draw'st thy native air,
  Pleased with thy freedom, proud of my despair:
  Thou may'st, since thou hast youth and courage join'd,
  A sweet behaviour and a solid mind,
  Assemble ours, and all the Theban race,
  To vindicate on Athens thy disgrace;
  And after, by some treaty made, possess
  Fair Emily, the pledge of lasting peace.
  So thine shall be the beauteous prize, while I      
  Must languish in despair, in prison die.
  Thus all the advantage of the strife is thine,
  Thy portion double joys, and double sorrows mine.

RHYME a a *

    The rage of jealousy then fired his soul,
  And his face kindled like a burning coal:
  Now cold despair, succeeding in her stead,
  To livid paleness turns the glowing red.
  His blood, scarce liquid, creeps within his veins,
  Like water which the freezing wind constrains.
  Then thus he said: Eternal Deities,                 
  Who rule the world with absolute decrees,
  And write whatever time shall bring to pass,
  With pens of adamant on plates of brass;
  What! is the race of human kind your care,
  Beyond what all his fellow-creatures are?

RHYME a a *

  He with the rest is liable to pain,
  And like the sheep, his brother-beast, is slain;
  Cold, hunger, prisons, ills without a cure,
  All these he must, and guiltless, oft endure.
  Or does your justice, power, or prescience fail,    
  When the good suffer, and the bad prevail?
  What worse to wretched virtue could befall,
  If fate or giddy fortune govern'd all?
  Nay, worse than other beasts is our estate;
  Them, to pursue their pleasures, you create;
  We, bound by harder laws, must curb our will,
  And your commands, not our desires, fulfil;

RHYME a a *

  Then when the creature is unjustly slain,
  Yet after death, at least, he feels no pain;
  But man, in life surcharged with woe before,        
  Not freed when dead, is doom'd to suffer more.
  A serpent shoots his sting at unaware;
  An ambush'd thief forelays a traveller:
  The man lies murder'd, while the thief and snake,
  One gains the thickets, and one threads the brake.
  This let divines decide; but well I know,
  Just, or unjust, I have my share of woe,
  Through Saturn seated in a luckless place,
  And Juno's wrath, that persecutes my race;
  Or Mars and Venus, in a quartile, move              
  My pangs of jealousy for Arcite's love.

RHYME a a *

    Let Palamon oppress'd in bondage mourn,
  While to his exiled rival we return.
  By this, the sun, declining from his height,
  The day had shorten'd to prolong the night;
  The lengthen'd night gave length of misery
  Both to the captive lover and the free.
  For Palamon in endless prison mourns,
  And Arcite forfeits life if he returns:
  The banish'd never hopes his love to see,           
  Nor hopes the captive lord his liberty.
  'Tis hard to say who suffers greater pains:
  One sees his love, but cannot break his chains:
  One free, and all his motions uncontroll'd,
  Beholds whate'er he would, but what he would behold.
  Judge as you please, for I will haste to tell
  What fortune to the banish'd knight befell.

RHYME a a *

    When Arcite was to Thebes return'd again,
  The loss of her he loved renew'd his pain;
  What could be worse, than never more to see         
  His life, his soul, his charming Emily?
  He raved with all the madness of despair,
  He roar'd, he beat his breast, he tore his hair.
  Dry sorrow in his stupid eyes appears,
  For, wanting nourishment, he wanted tears:
  His eye-balls in their hollow sockets sink,
  Bereft of sleep, he loathes his meat and drink.
  He withers at his heart, and looks as wan
  As the pale spectre of a murder'd man:

RHYME a a *

  That pale turns yellow, and his face receives       
  The faded hue of sapless boxen leaves:
  In solitary groves he makes his moan,
  Walks early out, and ever is alone:
  Nor, mix'd in mirth, in youthful pleasures shares,
  But sighs when songs and instruments he hears.

RHYME a a a

  His spirits are so low, his voice is drown'd,
  He hears as from afar, or in a swound,
  Like the deaf murmurs of a distant sound:

RHYME a a *

  Uncomb'd his locks and squalid his attire,
  Unlike the trim of love and gay desire;             
  But full of museful mopings, which presage
  The loss of reason, and conclude in rage.

RHYME a a *

    This when he had endured a year and more,
  Now wholly changed from what he was before,
  It happen'd once, that, slumbering as he lay,
  He dream'd (his dream began at break of day)
  That Hermes o'er his head in air appear'd,
  And with soft words his drooping spirits cheer'd:
  His hat, adorn'd with wings, disclosed the god,
  And in his hand he bore the sleep-compelling rod:   
  Such as he seem'd, when, at his sire's command,
  On Argus' head he laid the snaky wand.
  Arise, he said, to conquering Athens go,
  There fate appoints an end to all thy woe.

RHYME a a *

  The fright awaken'd Arcite with a start,
  Against his bosom bounced his heaving heart;
  But soon he said, with scarce-recover'd breath,
  And thither will I go, to meet my death.
  Sure to be slain; but death is my desire,
  Since in Emilia's sight I shall expire.             
  By chance he spied a mirror while he spoke,
  And gazing there, beheld his alter'd look;
  Wondering, he saw his features and his hue
  So much were changed, that scarce himself he knew.
  A sudden thought then starting in his mind,
  Since I in Arcite cannot Arcite find,
  The world may search in vain with all their eyes,
  But never penetrate through this disguise.
  Thanks to the change which grief and sickness give,
  In low estate I may securely live,                  

RHYME a a *

  And see unknown my mistress day by day.
  He said; and clothed himself in coarse array:
  A labouring hind in show; then forth he went,
  And to the Athenian towers his journey bent:
  One squire attended in the same disguise,
  Made conscious of his master's enterprise.
  Arrived at Athens, soon he came to court,
  Unknown, unquestion'd in that thick resort:
  Proffering for hire his service at the gate,
  To drudge, draw water, and to run or wait.          

RHYME a a *

    So fair befell him, that for little gain
  He served at first Emilia's chamberlain;
  And, watchful all advantages to spy,
  Was still at hand, and in his master's eye;
  And as his bones were big, and sinews strong,
  Refused no toil that could to slaves belong;
  But from deep wells with engines water drew,
  And used his noble hands the wood to hew.
  He pass'd a year at least attending thus
  On Emily, and call'd Philostratus.                  
  But never was there man of his degree
  So much esteem'd, so well beloved as he.
  So gentle of condition was he known,
  That through the court his courtesy was blown:

RHYME a a *

  All think him worthy of a greater place,
  And recommend him to the royal grace;
  That, exercised within a higher sphere,
  His virtues more conspicuous might appear.
  Thus by the general voice was Arcite praised,
  And by great Theseus to high favour raised;         
  Among his menial servants first enroll'd,
  And largely entertain'd with sums of gold:
  Besides what secretly from Thebes was sent,
  Of his own income, and his annual rent:
  This well employ'd, he purchased friends and fame,
  But cautiously conceal'd from whence it came.
  Thus for three years he lived with large increase,
  In arms of honour, and esteem in peace;
  To Theseus' person he was ever near;
  And Theseus for his virtues held him dear.          

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  While Arcite lives in bliss, the story turns
  Where hopeless Palamon in prison mourns.
  For six long years immured, the captive knight
  Had dragg'd his chains, and scarcely seen the light:
  Lost liberty and love at once he bore:
  His prison pain'd him much, his passion more:
  Nor dares he hope his fetters to remove,
  Nor ever wishes to be free from love.

RHYME a a *

    But when the sixth revolving year was run,
  And May within the Twins received the sun,                
  Were it by chance, or forceful destiny,
  Which forms in causes first whate'er shall be,
  Assisted by a friend, one moonless night,
  This Palamon from prison took his flight:
  A pleasant beverage he prepared before
  Of wine and honey, mix'd with added store
  Of opium; to his keeper this he brought,
  Who swallow'd unaware the sleepy draught,
  And snored secure till morn, his senses bound
  In slumber, and in long oblivion drown'd.                 
  Short was the night, and careful Palamon
  Sought the next covert e'er the rising sun.

RHYME a a a

  A thick-spread forest near the city lay,
  To this with lengthen'd strides he took his way,
  (For far he could not fly, and fear'd the day).

RHYME a a a

  Safe from pursuit, he meant to shun the light,
  Till the brown shadows of the friendly night
  To Thebes might favour his intended flight.

RHYME a a *

  When to his country come, his next design
  Was all the Theban race in arms to join,                  
  And war on Theseus, till he lost his life,
  Or won the beauteous Emily to wife.

RHYME a a *

    Thus while his thoughts the lingering day beguile,
  To gentle Arcite let us turn our style;
  Who little dreamt how nigh he was to care,
  Till treacherous fortune caught him in the snare.
  The morning lark, the messenger of day,
  Saluted in her song the morning gray;
  And soon the sun arose with beams so bright,
  That all the horizon laugh'd to see the joyous sight:     
  He with his tepid rays the rose renews,
  And licks the drooping leaves, and dries the dews;
  When Arcite left his bed, resolved to pay
  Observance to the month of merry May:
  Forth on his fiery steed betimes he rode,
  That scarcely prints the turf on which he trode:
  At ease he seem'd, and, prancing o'er the plains,
  Turn'd only to the grove his horse's reins,
  The grove I named before; and, lighted there,
  A woodbine garland sought to crown his hair;              
  Then turn'd his face against the rising day,
  And raised his voice to welcome in the May.

RHYME a a *

    For thee, sweet month! the groves green liveries wear,
  If not the first, the fairest of the year:
  For thee the Graces lead the dancing hours,
  And Nature's ready pencil paints the flowers:
  When thy short reign is past, the feverish sun
  The sultry tropic fears, and moves more slowly on.
  So may thy tender blossoms fear no blight,
  Nor goats with venom'd teeth thy tendrils bite,           
  As thou shalt guide my wandering feet to find
  The fragrant greens I seek, my brows to bind.

RHYME a a a

    His vows address'd, within the grove he stray'd,
  Till Fate, or Fortune, near the place convey'd
  His steps where, secret, Palamon was laid.

RHYME a a a

  Full little thought of him the gentle knight,
  Who, flying death, had there conceal'd his flight,
  In brakes and brambles hid, and shunning mortal sight:

RHYME a a *

  And less he knew him for his hated foe,
  But fear'd him as a man he did not know.                  
  But as it has been said of ancient years,
  That fields are full of eyes, and woods have ears;
  For this the wise are ever on their guard,
  For, unforeseen, they say, is unprepared.
  Uncautious Arcite thought himself alone,
  And less than all suspected Palamon,
  Who, listening, heard him, while he search'd the grove,
  And loudly sung his roundelay of love:
  But on the sudden stopp'd, and silent stood,
  As lovers often muse, and change their mood;

RHYME a a *

  Now high as heaven, and then as low as hell;
  Now up, now down, as buckets in a well:
  For Venus, like her day, will change her cheer,
  And seldom shall we see a Friday clear.
  Thus Arcite having sung, with alter'd hue
  Sunk on the ground, and from his bosom drew
  A desperate sigh, accusing Heaven and Fate,
  And angry Juno's unrelenting hate.

RHYME a a a

  Cursed be the day when first I did appear;
  Let it be blotted from the calendar,                      
  Lest it pollute the month, and poison all the year!

RHYME a a *

  Still will the jealous queen pursue our race?
  Cadmus is dead, the Theban city was:

RHYME a a *

  Yet ceases not her hate: for all who come
  From Cadmus are involved in Cadmus' doom.
  I suffer for my blood: unjust decree!
  That punishes another's crime on me.
  In mean estate I serve my mortal foe,
  The man who caused my country's overthrow.

RHYME a a a

  This is not all; for Juno, to my shame,             
  Has forced me to forsake my former name;
  Arcite I was, Philostratus I am.

RHYME a a *

  That side of heaven is all my enemy:
  Mars ruin'd Thebes: his mother ruin'd me.
  Of all the royal race remains but one
  Besides myself, the unhappy Palamon,
  Whom Theseus holds in bonds, and will not free;
  Without a crime, except his kin to me.
  Yet these, and all the rest, I could endure;
  But love's a malady without a cure:                 
  Fierce love has pierced me with his fiery dart;
  He fires within, and hisses at my heart.
  Your eyes, fair Emily, my fate pursue;
  I suffer for the rest, I die for you!
  Of such a goddess no time leaves record,
  Who burn'd the temple where she was adored:
  And let it burn, I never will complain,
  Pleased with my sufferings, if you knew my pain.

RHYME a a *

    At this a sickly qualm his heart assail'd,
  His ears ring inward, and his senses fail'd.        
  No word miss'd Palamon of all he spoke,
  But soon to deadly pale he changed his look:
  He trembled every limb, and felt a smart,
  As if cold steel had glided through his heart;
  No longer staid, but starting from his place,
  Discover'd stood, and show'd his hostile face:
  False traitor, Arcite! traitor to thy blood!
  Bound by thy sacred oath to seek my good,
  Now art thou found forsworn, for Emily;
  And darest attempt her love, for whom I die.        
  So hast thou cheated Theseus with a wile,
  Against thy vow, returning to beguile
  Under a borrow'd name: as false to me,
  So false thou art to him who set thee free.
  But rest assured, that either thou shalt die,
  Or else renounce thy claim in Emily:
  For though unarm'd I am, and (freed by chance)
  Am here without my sword, or pointed lance,
  Hope not, base man, unquestioned hence to go,
  For I am Palamon, thy mortal foe.                   

RHYME a a *

    Arcite, who heard his tale, and knew the man,
  His sword unsheath'd, and fiercely thus began:
  Now by the gods who govern heaven above,
  Wert thou not weak with hunger, mad with love,
  That word had been thy last, or in this grove
  This hand should force thee to renounce thy love.

RHYME a a a

  The surety which I gave thee, I defy:
  Fool, not to know that love endures no tie,
  And Jove but laughs at lovers' perjury.

RHYME a a *

  Know I will serve the fair in thy despite;          
  But since thou art my kinsman, and a knight,
  Here, have my faith, to-morrow in this grove
  Our arms shall plead the titles of our love:
  And Heaven so help my right, as I alone
  Will come, and keep the cause and quarrel both unknown;
  With arms of proof both for myself and thee;
  Choose thou the best, and leave the worst to me.
  And, that at better ease thou may'st abide,
  Bedding and clothes I will this night provide,
  And needful sustenance, that thou may'st be         
  A conquest better won, and worthy me.
  His promise Palamon accepts; but pray'd
  To keep it better than the first he made.
  Thus fair they parted till the morrow's dawn,
  For each had laid his plighted faith to pawn.

RHYME a a a

  Oh, Love! thou sternly dost thy power maintain,
  And wilt not bear a rival in thy reign;
  Tyrants and thou all fellowship disdain!

RHYME a a * 

 This was in Arcite proved, and Palamon,
  Both in despair, yet each would love alone.         
  Arcite return'd, and, as in honour tied,
  His foe with bedding, and with food supplied;
  Then, ere the day, two suits of armour sought,
  Which, borne before him on his steed, he brought:
  Both were of shining steel, and wrought so pure,
  As might the strokes of two such arms endure.
  Now, at the time, and in the appointed place,
  The challenger and challenged, face to face,
  Approach; each other from afar they knew,
  And from afar their hatred changed their hue.       
  So stands the Thracian herdsman with his spear,
  Pull in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear,
  And hears him rustling in the wood, and sees
  His course at distance by the bending trees;
  And thinks, Here comes my mortal enemy,
  And either he must fall in fight, or I:

RHYME a a a

  This while he thinks, he lifts aloft his dart;
  A generous chilness seizes every part:
  The veins pour back the blood, and fortify the heart.

RHYME a a *

    Thus pale they meet; their eyes with fury burn;   
  None greets; for none the greeting will return:
  But in dumb surliness, each arm'd with care
  His foe profess'd, as brother of the war:
  Then both, no moment lost, at once advance
  Against each other, arm'd with sword and lance:
  They lash, they foin, they pass, they strive to bore
  Their corslets and the thinnest parts explore.
  Thus two long hours in equal arms they stood,
  And wounded, wound, till both were bathed in blood;
  And not a foot of ground had either got,            
  As if the world depended on the spot.
  Fell Arcite like an angry tiger fared,
  And like a lion Palamon appear'd:
  Or, as two boars, whom love to battle draws,
  With rising bristles, and with frothy jaws,
  Their adverse breasts with tusks oblique they wound;
  With grunts and groans the forest rings around.
  So fought the knights, and fighting must abide,
  Till fate an umpire sends their difference to decide.

RHYME a a *

    The power that ministers to God's decrees,        
  And executes on earth what Heaven foresees,
  Call'd providence, or chance, or fatal sway,
  Comes with resistless force, and finds or makes her way.
  Nor kings, nor nations, nor united power,
  One moment can retard the appointed hour;
  And some one day, some wondrous chance appears,
  Which happen'd not in centuries of years:
  For sure, whate'er we mortals hate, or love,
  Or hope, or fear, depends on Powers above;
  They move our appetites to good or ill,             
  And by foresight necessitate the will.
  In Theseus this appears; whose youthful joy
  Was beasts of chase in forests to destroy:

RHYME a a a

  This gentle knight, inspired by jolly May,
  Forsook his easy couch at early day,
  And to the wood and wilds pursued his way.

RHYME a a *

  Beside him rode Hippolita the queen,
  And Emily attired in lively green,
  With horns, and hounds, and all the tuneful cry,
  To hunt a royal hart within the covert nigh:        
  And as he follow'd Mars before, so now
  He serves the goddess of the silver bow.
  The way that Theseus took was to the wood
  Where the two knights in cruel battle stood:
  The lawn on which they fought, the appointed place
  In which the uncoupled hounds began the chase.
  Thither forth-right he rode to rouse the prey,
  That, shaded by the fern, in harbour lay;
  And thence dislodged, was wont to leave the wood
  For open fields, and cross the crystal flood.       
  Approach'd, and looking underneath the sun,
  He saw proud Arcite, and fierce Palamon,
  In mortal battle doubling blow on blow,
  Like lightning flamed their falchions to and fro,
  And shot a dreadful gleam; so strong they strook,
  There seem'd less force required to fell an oak:
  He gazed with wonder on their equal might,
  Look'd eager on, but knew not either knight:
  Resolved to learn, he spurr'd his fiery steed
  With goring rowels to provoke his speed.            
  The minute ended that began the race,
  So soon he was betwixt them on the place;
  And, with his sword unsheath'd, on pain of life
  Commands both combatants to cease their strife:
  Then with imperious tone pursues his threat:
  What are you? why in arms together met?

RHYME a a *

  How dares your pride presume against my laws,
  As in a listed field to fight your cause?
  Unask'd the royal grant; no marshal by,
  As knightly rites require; nor judge to try?        
  Then Palamon, with scarce recover'd breath,
  Thus hasty spoke: We both deserve the death,
  And both would die; for look the world around,
  A pair so wretched is not to be found;
  Our life's a load; encumber'd with the charge,
  We long to set the imprison'd soul at large.

RHYME a a a

  Now, as thou art a sovereign judge, decree
  The rightful doom of death to him and me;
  Let neither find thy grace, for grace is cruelty.

RHYME a a *

  Me first, oh, kill me first, and cure my woe;       
  Then sheath the sword of justice on my foe:
  Or kill him first; for when his name is heard,
  He foremost will receive his due reward.
  Arcite of Thebes is he; thy mortal foe:
  On whom thy grace did liberty bestow,

RHYME a a *

  But first contracted, that if ever found
  By day or night upon the Athenian ground,
  His head should pay the forfeit; see return'd
  The perjured knight, his oath and honour scorn'd.
  For this is he, who, with a borrow'd name           
  And proffer'd service, to thy palace came,

RHYME a a a

  Now call'd Philostratus: retain'd by thee,
  A traitor trusted, and in high degree,
  Aspiring to the bed of beauteous Emily.

RHYME a a *

  My part remains; from Thebes my birth I own,
  And call myself the unhappy Palamon.
  Think me not like that man; since no disgrace
  Can force me to renounce the honour of my race.
  Know me for what I am: I broke my chain,
  Nor promised I thy prisoner to remain:              
  The love of liberty with life is given,
  And life itself the inferior gift of Heaven.
  Thus without crime I fled; but further know,
  I, with this Arcite, am thy mortal foe:
  Then give me death, since I thy life pursue;
  For safeguard of thyself, death is my due.
  More would'st thou know? I love bright Emily,
  And, for her sake, and in her sight will die:

RHYME a a a

  But kill my rival too; for he no less
  Deserves; and I thy righteous doom will bless,      
  Assured that what I lose, he never shall possess.

RHYME a a *

    To this replied the stern Athenian prince,
  And sourly smiled: In owning your offence
  You judge yourself; and I but keep record
  In place of law, while you pronounce the word.
  Take your desert, the death you have decreed;
  I seal your doom, and ratify the deed:
  By Mars, the patron of my arms, you die!
    He said; dumb sorrow seized the standers-by.
  The queen above the rest, by nature good,           
  (The pattern form'd of perfect womanhood)
  For tender pity wept: when she began,
  Through the bright quire the infectious virtue ran.
  All dropt their tears, even the contended maid;
  And thus among themselves they softly said:
  What eyes can suffer this unworthy sight!
  Two youths of royal blood, renown'd in fight,
  The mastership of Heaven in face and mind,
  And lovers, far beyond their faithless kind:
  See their wide streaming wounds; they neither came  
  For pride of empire, nor desire of fame:
  Kings fight for kingdoms, madmen for applause;
  But love for love alone; that crowns the lover's cause.
  This thought, which ever bribes the beauteous kind,
  Such pity wrought in every lady's mind,
  They left their steeds, and, prostrate on the place,
  From the fierce king implored the offenders' grace.

RHYME a a *

    He paused a while, stood silent in his mood
  (For yet his rage was boiling in his blood);
  But soon his tender mind the impression felt,       
  (As softest metals are not slow to melt,
  And pity soonest runs in softest minds):
  Then reasons with himself; and first he finds
  His passion cast a mist before his sense,
  And either made, or magnified the offence.
  Offence! of what? to whom? who judged the cause?
  The prisoner freed himself by nature's laws:
  Born free, he sought his right: the man he freed
  Was perjured, but his love excused the deed.
  Thus pondering, he look'd under with his eyes,      
  And saw the women's tears, and heard their cries;
  Which moved compassion more; he shook his head,
  And, softly sighing, to himself he said:
  Curse on the unpardoning prince, whom tears can draw
  To no remorse; who rules by lions' law;

RHYME a a *

  And deaf to prayers, by no submission bow'd,
  Rends all alike; the penitent, and proud!
  At this, with look serene, he raised his head;
  Reason resumed her place, and passion fled:
  Then thus aloud he spoke: The power of love,        
  In earth, and seas, and air, and heaven above,
  Rules, unresisted, with an awful nod;
  By daily miracles declared a god:
  He blinds the wise, gives eyesight to the blind;
  And moulds and stamps anew the lover's mind.
  Behold that Arcite, and this Palamon,
  Freed from my fetters, and in safety gone,
  What hinder'd either in their native soil
  At ease to reap the harvest of their toil?
  But Love, their lord, did otherwise ordain,         
  And brought them in their own despite again,
  To suffer death deserved; for well they know,
  'Tis in my power, and I their deadly foe.
  The proverb holds, that to be wise and love,
  Is hardly granted to the gods above.

RHYME a a *

  See how the madmen bleed! behold the gains
  With which their master, Love, rewards their pains!
  For seven long years, on duty every day,
  Lo, their obedience, and their monarch's pay:
  Yet, as in duty bound, they serve him on;           
  And, ask the fools, they think it wisely done;
  Nor ease, nor wealth, nor life itself regard,
  For 'tis their maxim, Love is love's reward.
  This is not all; the fair, for whom they strove,
  Nor knew before, nor could suspect their love;
  Nor thought, when she beheld the sight from far,
  Her beauty was the occasion of the war.
  But sure a general doom on man is past,
  And all are fools and lovers, first or last:
  This both by others and myself I know,              
  For I have served their sovereign long ago;

RHYME a a a

  Oft have been caught within the winding train
  Of female snares, and felt the lover's pain,
  And learn'd how far the god can human hearts constrain.

RHYME a a *

  To this remembrance, and the prayers of those
  Who for the offending warriors interpose,
  I give their forfeit lives; on this accord,
  To do me homage as their sovereign lord;
  And, as my vassals, to their utmost might,
  Assist my person, and assert my right.              

RHYME a a *

    This freely sworn, the knights their grace obtain'd;
  Then thus the king his secret thoughts explain'd:
  If wealth, or honour, or a royal race,
  Or each, or all, may win a lady's grace,
  Then either of you knights may well deserve
  A princess born; and such is she you serve:
  For Emily is sister to the crown,
  And but too well to both her beauty known:
  But should you combat till you both were dead,
  Two lovers cannot share a single bed:               
  As, therefore, both are equal in degree,
  The lot of both be left to destiny.
  Now hear the award, and happy may it prove
  To her, and him who best deserves her love.
  Depart from hence in peace, and, free as air,
  Search the wide world, and where you please repair;
  But on the day when this returning sun
  To the same point through every sign has run,

RHYME a a *

  Then each of you his hundred knights shall bring,
  In royal lists, to fight before the king;           
  And then the knight, whom fate or happy chance
  Shall with his friends to victory advance,
  And grace his arms so far in equal fight,
  From out the bars to force his opposite,
  Or kill, or make him recreant on the plain,
  The prize of valour and of love shall gain;
  The vanquish'd party shall their claim release,
  And the long jars conclude in lasting peace.
  The charge be mine to adorn the chosen ground,
  The theatre of war, for champions so renown'd;      

RHYME a a a

  And take the patron's place of either knight,
  With eyes impartial to behold the fight;
  And Heaven of me so judge as I shall judge aright.

RHYME a a *

  If both are satisfied with this accord,
  Swear by the laws of knighthood on my sword.

RHYME a a *

    Who now but Palamon exults with joy?
  And ravish'd Arcite seems to touch the sky:
  The whole assembled troop was pleased as well,
  Extol the award, and on their knees they fell
  To bless the gracious king. The knights, with leave,
  Departing from the place, his last commands receive;
  On Emily with equal ardour look,
  And from her eyes their inspiration took.
  From thence to Thebes' old walls pursue their way,
  Each to provide his champions for the day.

RHYME a a *

    It might be deem'd, on our historian's part,
  Or too much negligence, or want of art,
  If he forgot the vast magnificence
  Of royal Theseus, and his large expense,
  He first enclosed for lists a level ground,         
  The whole circumference a mile around;
  The form was circular; and all without
  A trench was sunk, to moat the place about.
  Within an amphitheatre appear'd,
  Raised in degrees; to sixty paces rear'd:
  That when a man was placed in one degree,
  Height was allow'd for him above to see.

RHYME a a *

    Eastward was built a gate of marble white;
  The like adorn'd the western opposite.
  A nobler object than this fabric was,               
  Rome never saw; nor of so vast a space.
  For rich with spoils of many a conquer'd land,
  All arts and artists Theseus could command;
  Who sold for hire, or wrought for better fame;
  The master-painters, and the carvers came.
  So rose within the compass of the year
  An age's work, a glorious theatre.
  Then o'er its eastern gate was raised above
  A temple, sacred to the Queen of Love;
  An altar stood below: on either hand                
  A priest with roses crown'd, who held a myrtle wand.
    The dome of Mars was on the gate opposed,
  And on the north a turret was enclosed,

RHYME a a a

  Within the wall, of alabaster white,
  And crimson coral, for the Queen of Night,
  Who takes in sylvan sports her chaste delight.

RHYME a a *

    Within these oratories might you see
  Rich carvings, portraitures, and imagery:
  Where every figure to the life express'd
  The godhead's power to whom it was address'd.       
  In Venus' temple on the sides were seen
  The broken slumbers of enamour'd men;
  Prayers that even spoke, and pity seem'd to call,
  And issuing sighs that smoked along the wall;
  Complaints, and hot desires, the lover's hell,
  And scalding tears that wore a channel where they fell:

RHYME a a a

  And all around were nuptial bonds, the ties,
  Of love's assurance, and a train of lies,
  That, made in lust, conclude in perjuries.

RHYME a a *

  Beauty, and Youth, and Wealth, and Luxury,          
  And spritely Hope, and short-enduring Joy;
  And Sorceries to raise the infernal powers,
  And Sigils framed in planetary hours:
  Expense, and After-Thought, and idle Care,
  And Doubts of motley hue, and dark Despair;
  Suspicious, and fantastical Surmise,
  And Jealousy suffused, with jaundice in her eyes,
  Discolouring all she view'd, in tawny dress'd,
  Down-look'd, and with a cuckoo on her fist.
  Opposed to her, on the other side advance           
  The costly feast, the carol, and the dance,

RHYME a a *

  Minstrels and Music, Poetry and Play,
  And balls by night, and tournaments by day.
  All these were painted on the wall, and more;
  With acts and monuments of times before:
  And others added by prophetic doom,
  And lovers yet unborn, and loves to come:
  For there the Idalian mount, and Citheron,
  The court of Venus, was in colours drawn:
  Before the palace-gate, in careless dress,          
  And loose array, sat portress Idleness:

RHYME a a a
 
 There, by the fount, Narcissus pined alone;
  There Samson was; with wiser Solomon,
  And all the mighty names by love undone.

RHYME a a *

  Medea's charms were there, Circean feasts,
  With bowls that turn'd enamour'd youths to beasts:
  Here might be seen, that beauty, wealth, and wit,
  And prowess, to the power of love submit:

RHYME a a *

  The spreading snare for all mankind is laid;
  And lovers all betray, and are betray'd.            
  The goddess self some noble hand had wrought;
  Smiling she seem'd, and full of pleasing thought:
  From ocean as she first began to rise,
  And smooth'd the ruffled seas and clear'd the skies;
  She trode the brine, all bare below the breast,
  And the green waves but ill conceal'd the rest;
  A lute she held; and on her head was seen
  A wreath of roses red, and myrtles green;
  Her turtles fann'd the buxom air above;
  And, by his mother, stood an infant Love,           

RHYME a a a

  With wings unfledged; his eyes were banded o'er;
  His hands a bow, his back a quiver bore,
  Supplied with arrows bright and keen, a deadly store.

RHYME a a *

    But in the dome of mighty Mars the red
  With different figures all the sides were spread;
  This temple, less in form, with equal grace,
  Was imitative of the first in Thrace:
  For that cold region was the loved abode
  And sovereign mansion of the warrior god.
  The landscape was a forest wide and bare;           
  Where neither beast, nor human kind repair;
  The fowl, that scent afar, the borders fly,
  And shun the bitter blast, and wheel about the sky.
  A cake of scurf lies baking on the ground,
  And prickly stubs, instead of trees, are found;
  Or woods, with knots and knares, deform'd and old;
  Headless the most, and hideous to behold:
  A rattling tempest through the branches went,
  That stripp'd them bare, and one sole way they bent.

RHYME a a *

  Heaven froze above, severe, the clouds congeal,     
  And through the crystal vault appear'd the standing hail.
  Such was the face without; a mountain stood
  Threatening from high, and overlook'd the wood:
  Beneath the lowering brow, and on a bent,
  The temple stood of Mars armipotent:
  The frame of burnish'd steel, that cast a glare
  From far, and seem'd to thaw the freezing air.
  A strait long entry to the temple led,
  Blind with high walls; and horror over head:
  Thence issued such a blast, and hollow roar,        
  As threaten'd from the hinge to heave the door:
  In through that door, a northern light there shone;
  'Twas all it had, for windows there were none.
  The gate was adamant; eternal frame!
  Which, hew'd by Mars himself, from Indian quarries came,

RHYME a a *

  The labour of a god; and all along
  Tough iron plates were clench'd to make it strong.
  A tun about was every pillar there;
  A polish'd mirror shone not half so clear.

RHYME a a a

  There saw I how the secret felon wrought,           
  And treason labouring in the traitor's thought;
  And midwife Time the ripen'd plot to murder brought.

RHYME a a *

  There the red Anger dared the pallid Fear;
  Next stood Hypocrisy, with holy leer,
  Soft smiling, and demurely looking down,
  But hid the dagger underneath the gown:
  The assassinating wife, the household fiend;
  And far the blackest there, the traitor-friend.
  On the other side, there stood Destruction bare;
  Unpunish'd Rapine, and a waste of War.              
  Contest, with sharpen'd knives, in cloisters drawn,
  And all with blood bespread the holy lawn.

RHYME a a a

  Loud menaces were heard, and foul disgrace,
  And bawling infamy, in language base;
  Till sense was lost in sound, and silence fled the place.

RHYME a a *

  The slayer of himself yet saw I there,
  The gore congeal'd was clotted in his hair;
  With eyes half closed, and gaping mouth he lay,
  And grim, as when he breathed his sullen soul away.
  In midst of all the dome, Misfortune sate,          
  And gloomy Discontent, and fell Debate,
  And Madness laughing in his ireful mood;
  And arm'd complaint on theft; and cries of blood.
  There was the murder'd corpse in covert laid,
  And violent death in thousand shapes display'd:
  The city to the soldiers rage resigned:
  Successless wars, and poverty behind:
  Ships burnt in fight, or forced on rocky shores,
  And the rash hunter strangled by the boars:
  The new-born babe by nurses overlaid;               
  And the cook caught within the raging fire he made.
  All ills of Mars his nature, flame and steel;
  The gasping charioteer, beneath the wheel

RHYME a a *

  Of his own car; the ruin'd house that falls
  And intercepts her lord betwixt the walls:
  The whole division that to Mars pertains,
  All trades of death that deal in steel for gains,
  Were there: the butcher, armourer, and smith,
  Whose forges sharpen'd falchions, or the scythe.
  The scarlet conquest on a tower was placed,         
  With shouts, and soldiers' acclamations graced:
  A pointed sword hung threatening o'er his head,
  Sustain'd but by a slender twine of thread.
  There saw I Mars his ides, the Capitol,
  The seer in vain foretelling Caesar's fall;
  The last triumvirs, and the wars they move,
  And Antony, who lost the world for love.
  These, and a thousand more, the fane adorn;
  Their fates were painted ere the men were born,
  All copied from the heavens, and ruling force       
  Of the red star, in his revolving course.
  The form of Mars high on a chariot stood,
  All sheath'd in arms, and gruffly look'd the god:
  
RHYME a a a

Two geomantic figures were display'd
  Above his head, a warrior and a maid,
  One when direct, and one when retrograde.

RHYME a a *

    Tired with deformities of death, I haste
  To the third temple of Diana chaste.
  A sylvan scene with various greens was drawn,
  Shades on the sides, and in the midst a lawn:       
  The silver Cynthia, with her nymphs around,
  Pursued the flying deer, the woods with horns resound:
  Calisto there stood manifest of shame,
  And, turn'd a bear, the northern star became:
  Her son was next, and, by peculiar grace,
  In the cold circle held the second place:
  The stag Acteon in the stream had spied
  The naked huntress, and, for seeing, died:
  His hounds, unknowing of his change pursue
  The chase, and their mistaken master slew.          
  Peneian Daphne too was there to see,
  Apollo's love before, and now his tree:
  The adjoining fane the assembled Greeks express'd,
  And hunting of the Caledonian beast.

RHYME a a *

  Oenides' valour, and his envied prize;
  The fatal power of Atalanta's eyes;
  Diana's vengeance on the victor shown,
  The murderess mother; and consuming son;
  The Volscian queen extended on the plain;
  The treason punish'd, and the traitor slain.        
  The rest were various huntings, well design'd,
  And savage beasts destroy'd, of every kind.

RHYME a a a
 
 The graceful goddess was array'd in green;
  About her feet were little beagles seen,
  That watch'd with upward eyes the motions of their queen.

RHYME a a a

  Her legs were buskin'd, and the left before,
  In act to shoot; a silver bow she bore,
  And at her back a painted quiver wore.

RHYME a a *

  She trod a waxing moon, that soon would wane,
  And, drinking borrow'd light, be fill'd again:      
  With downcast eyes, as seeming to survey
  The dark dominions, her alternate sway.
  Before her stood a women in her throes,
  And call'd Lucina's aid, her burden to disclose.
  All these the painter drew with such command,
  That Nature snatch'd the pencil from his hand,
  Ashamed and angry that his art could feign
  And mend the tortures of a mother's pain.
  Theseus beheld the fanes of every god,
  And thought his mighty cost was well bestow'd.      
  So princes now their poets should regard;
  But few can write, and fewer can reward.

RHYME a a *

    The theatre thus raised, the lists enclosed,
  And all with vast magnificence disposed,
  We leave the monarch pleased, and haste to bring
  The knights to combat, and their arms to sing.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  The day approach'd when Fortune should decide
  The important enterprise, and give the bride;
  For now, the rivals round the world had sought,
  And each his number, well appointed, brought.
  The nations, far and near, contend in choice,
  And send the flower of war by public voice;
  That after, or before, were never known
  Such chiefs, as each an army seem'd alone:
  Beside the champions, all of high degree,
  Who knighthood loved, and deeds of chivalry,              
  Throng'd to the lists, and envied to behold
  The names of others, not their own, enroll'd.

RHYME a a a

  Nor seems it strange; for every noble knight
  Who loves the fair, and is endued with might,
  In such a quarrel would be proud to fight.

RHYME a a *

  There breathes not scarce a man on British ground
  (An isle for love and arms of old renown'd)
  But would have sold his life to purchase fame,
  To Palamon or Arcite sent his name:
  
RHYME a a *

And had the land selected of the best,                    
  Half had come hence, and let the world provide the rest.
  A hundred knights with Palamon there came,
  Approved in fight, and men of mighty name;
  Their arms were several, as their nations were,
  But furnish'd all alike with sword and spear.
  Some wore coat-armour, imitating scale;
  And next their skins were stubborn shirts of mail.
  Some wore a breastplate and a light jupon,
  Their horses clothed with rich caparison:
  Some for defence would leathern bucklers use,             
  Of folded hides; and others shields of pruce.
  One hung a pole-axe at his saddle-bow,
  And one a heavy mace to stun the foe;
  One for his legs and knees provided well,
  With jambeaux arm'd, and double plates of steel:
  This on his helmet wore a lady's glove,
  And that a sleeve embroider'd by his love.

RHYME a a a

    With Palamon above the rest in place,
  Lycurgus came, the surly king of Thrace;
  Black was his beard, and manly was his face;              
  
RHYME a a *

The balls of his broad eyes roll'd in his head,
  And glared betwixt a yellow and a red:
  He look'd a lion with a gloomy stare,
  And o'er his eyebrows hung his matted hair:
  Big-boned, and large of limbs, with sinews strong,
  Broad-shoulder'd, and his arms were round and long.
  Four milk-white bulls (the Thracian use of old)
  Were yoked to draw his car of burnish'd gold.
  Upright he stood, and bore aloft his shield,
  Conspicuous from afar, and overlook'd the field.          
  His surcoat was a bear-skin on his back;
  His hair hung long behind, and glossy raven black.
  His ample forehead bore a coronet,
  With sparkling diamonds and with rubies set:

RHYME a a a

  Ten brace, and more, of greyhounds, snowy fair,
  And tall as stags, ran loose, and coursed around his chair,
  A match for pards in flight, in grappling for the bear:

RHYME a a *

  With golden muzzles all their mouths were bound,
  And collars of the same their necks surround.
  Thus through the fields Lycurgus took his way;            
  His hundred knights attend in pomp and proud array.

RHYME a a *

    To match this monarch, with strong Arcite came
  Emetrius, king of Ind, a mighty name;
  On a bay courser, goodly to behold,
  The trappings of his horse adorn'd with barbarous gold.
  Not Mars bestrod a steed with greater grace;
  His surcoat o'er his arms was cloth of Thrace,
  Adorn'd with pearls, all orient, round, and great;
  His saddle was of gold, with emeralds set,
  His shoulders large a mantle did attire,                  
  With rubies thick, and sparkling as the fire:
  His amber-colour'd locks in ringlets run,
  With graceful negligence, and shone against the sun.
  His nose was aquiline, his eyes were blue;
  Ruddy his lips, and fresh and fair his hue:
  Some sprinkled freckles on his face were seen,
  Whose dusk set off the whiteness of the skill:
  His awful presence did the crowd surprise,
  Nor durst the rash spectator meet his eyes;
  Eyes that confess'd him born for kingly sway,             
  So fierce, they flash'd intolerable day.
  His age in nature's youthful prime appear'd,
  And just began to bloom his yellow beard.
  Whene'er he spoke, his voice was heard around,
  Loud as a trumpet, with a silver sound;
  A laurel wreathed his temples, fresh and green;
  And myrtle sprigs, the marks of love, were mix'd between.
  Upon his fist he bore, for his delight,
  An eagle well reclaim'd, and lily white.

RHYME a a *

    His hundred knights attend him to the war,              
  All arm'd for battle; save their heads were bare.
  Words and devices blazed on every shield,
  And pleasing was the terror of the field.

RHYME a a a

  For kings, and dukes, and barons, you might see,
  Like sparkling stars, though different in degree,
  All for the increase of arms, and love of chivalry.

RHYME a a *

  Before the king tame leopards led the way,
  And troops of lions innocently play.
  So Bacchus through the conquer'd Indies rode,
  And beasts in gambols frisk'd before their honest god.  

RHYME a a *

    In this array, the war of either side
  Through Athens pass'd with military pride.
  At prime, they enter'd on the Sunday morn;
  Rich tapestry spread the streets, and flowers the posts adorn.
  The town was all a jubilee of feasts;
  So Theseus will'd, in honour of his guests;
  Himself with open arms the kings embraced,
  Then all the rest in their degrees were graced.
  No harbinger was needful for the night,
  For every house was proud to lodge a knight.        

RHYME a a *

    I pass the royal treat, nor must relate
  The gifts bestow'd, nor how the champions sate:
  Who first, who last, or how the knights address'd
  Their vows, or who was fairest at the feast;
  Whose voice, whose graceful dance did most surprise;
  Soft amorous sighs, and silent love of eyes.
  The rivals call my Muse another way,
  To sing their vigils for the ensuing day.

RHYME a a *

    'Twas ebbing darkness, past the noon of night:
  And Phosphor, on the confines of the light,         

RHYME a a a

  Promised the sun; ere day began to spring,
  The tuneful lark already stretch'd her wing,
  And flickering on her nest, made short essays to sing.

RHYME a a a

  When wakeful Palamon, preventing day,
  Took to the royal lists his early way,
  To Venus at her fane, in her own house, to pray.

RHYME a a *

  There, falling on his knees before her shrine,
  He thus implored with prayers her power divine:

RHYME a a *

    Creator Venus, genial power of love,
  The bliss of men below, and gods above!             
  Beneath the sliding sun thou runn'st thy race,
  Dost fairest shine, and best become thy place.
  For thee the winds their eastern blasts forbear,
  Thy month reveals the spring, and opens all the year.

RHYME a a a
  
Thee, goddess! thee the storms of winter fly,
  Earth smiles with flowers renewing, laughs the sky,
  And birds to lays of love their tuneful notes apply.

RHYME a a *

  For thee the lion loathes the taste of blood,
  And, roaring, hunts his female through the wood:
  For thee the bulls rebellow through the groves,     
  And tempt the stream, and snuff their absent loves.

RHYME a a a

  'Tis thine, whate'er is pleasant, good, or fair:
  All nature is thy province, life thy care:
  Thou madest the world, and dost the world repair.

RHYME a a *

  Thou gladder of the mount of Cytheron,
  Increase of Jove, companion of the sun!
  If e'er Adonis touch'd thy tender heart,
  Have pity, goddess, for thou know'st the smart!
  Alas! I have not words to tell my grief;
  To vent my sorrow would be some relief;             
  Light sufferings give us leisure to complain;
  We groan, but cannot speak, in greater pain.
  O goddess! tell thyself what I would say,
  Thou know'st it, and I feel too much to pray.
  So grant my suit, as I enforce my might,
  In love to be thy champion, and thy knight;
  A servant to thy sex, a slave to thee,
  A foe profess'd to barren chastity.
  Nor ask I fame or honour of the field,
  Nor choose I more to vanquish than to yield:        
  In my divine Emilia make me blest;
  Let Fate, or partial Chance, dispose the rest:

RHYME a a *

  Find thou the manner, and the means prepare;
  Possession, more than conquest, is my care.
  Mars is the warrior's god; in him it lies,
  On whom he favours to confer the prize;
  With smiling aspect you serenely move
  In your fifth orb, and rule the realm of love.
  The Fates but only spin the coarser clue,
  The finest of the wool is left for you;             
  Spare me but one small portion of the twine,
  And let the sisters cut below your line:
  The rest among the rubbish may they sweep,
  Or add it to the yarn of some old miser's heap.
  But, if you this ambitious prayer deny,
  (A wish, I grant, beyond mortality,)
  Then let me sink beneath proud Arcite's arms,
  And I once dead, let him possess her charms.

RHYME a a *

    Thus ended he; then with observance due
  The sacred incense on her altar threw:              
  The curling smoke mounts heavy from the fires;
  At length it catches flame, and in a blaze expires;
  At once the gracious goddess gave the sign,
  Her statue shook, and trembled all the shrine:
  Pleased Palamon the tardy omen took:
  For, since the flames pursued the trailing smoke,
  He knew his boon was granted; but the day
  To distance driven, and joy adjourn'd with long delay.

RHYME a a *

    Now morn with rosy light had streak'd the sky,
  Up rose the sun, and up rose Emily;                 
  Address'd her early steps to Cynthia's fane,
  In state attended by her maiden train,
  Who bore the vests that holy rites require,
  Incense, and odorous gums, and cover'd fire.
  The plenteous horns with pleasant mead they crown,
  Nor wanted aught besides in honour of the Moon.
  Now while the temple smoked with hallow'd steam,
  They wash the virgin in a living stream;
  The secret ceremonies I conceal,
  Uncouth, perhaps unlawful, to reveal:               
  But such they were as Pagan use required,
  Perform'd by women when the men retired,
  Whose eyes profane their chaste mysterious rites
  Might turn to scandal, or obscene delights.
  Well-meaners think no harm; but for the rest,
  Things sacred they pervert, and silence is the best.
  Her shining hair, uncomb'd, was loosely spread,
  A crown of mastless oak adorn'd her head:
  When to the shrine approach'd, the spotless maid
  Had kindling fires on either altar laid:            

RHYME a a *

  (The rites were such as were observed of old,
  By Statius in his Theban story told.)
  Then kneeling with her hands across her breast,
  Thus lowly she preferr'd her chaste request:
  Oh, goddess, haunter of the woodland green,
  To whom both heaven and earth and seas are seen;
  Queen of the nether skies, where half the year
  Thy silver beams descend, and light the gloomy sphere!
  Goddess of maids, and conscious of our hearts,
  So keep me from the vengeance of thy darts,         
  Which Niobe's devoted issue felt,
  When hissing through the skies the feather'd deaths were dealt;
  As I desire to live a virgin life,
  Nor know the name of mother or of wife.
  Thy votress from my tender years I am,
  And love, like thee, the woods and sylvan game.

RHYME a a a

  Like death, thou know'st, I loathe the nuptial state,
  And man, the tyrant of our sex, I hate,
  A lowly servant, but a lofty mate:

RHYME a a *

  Where love is duty on the female side;              
  On theirs, mere sensual gust, and sought with surly pride.
  Now by thy triple shape, as thou art seen
  In heaven, earth, hell, and everywhere a queen,
  Grant this my first desire; let discord cease,
  And make betwixt the rivals lasting peace:
  Quench their hot fire, or far from me remove
  The flame, and turn it on some other love;
  Or, if my frowning stars have so decreed,
  That one must be rejected, one succeed,
  Make him my lord, within whose faithful breast      
  Is fix'd my image, and who loves me best.
  But, oh! even that avert! I choose it not,
  But take it as the least unhappy lot.
  A maid I am, and of thy virgin train;
  Oh, let me still that spotless name retain!
  Frequent the forests, thy chaste will obey,
  And only make the beasts of chase my prey!

RHYME a a *

    The flames ascend on either altar clear,
  While thus the blameless maid address'd her prayer.
  When, lo! the burning fire that shone so bright,    
  Flew off all sudden, with extinguish'd light,
  And left one altar dark, a little space;
  Which turn'd self-kindled, and renew'd the blaze:
  The other victor-flame a moment stood,
  Then fell, and lifeless left the extinguish'd wood;
  For ever lost, the irrevocable light
  Forsook the blackening coals, and sunk to night:

RHYME a a a

  At either end it whistled as it flew,
  And as the brands were green, so dropp'd the dew;
  Infected as it fell with sweat of sanguine hue.     

RHYME a a *

    The maid from that ill omen turn'd her eyes,
  And with loud shrieks and clamours rent the skies,
  Nor knew what signified the boding sign,
  But found the Powers displeased, and fear'd the wrath divine.

RHYME a a *

    Then shook the sacred shrine, and sudden light
  Sprung through the vaulted roof, and made the temple bright.

RHYME a a *

    The Power, behold! the Power in glory shone,
  By her bent bow, and her keen arrows known;
  The rest, a huntress issuing from the wood,
  Reclining on her cornel spear she stood.            
  Then gracious thus began: Dismiss thy fear,
  And Heaven's unchanged decrees attentive hear:
  More powerful gods have torn thee from my side,
  Unwilling to resign, and doom'd a bride:
  The two contending knights are weigh'd above;
  One Mars protects, and one the Queen of Love:
  But which the man, is in the Thunderer's breast;
  This he pronounced, 'Tis he who loves thee best.
  The fire that, once extinct, revived again,
  Foreshows the love allotted to remain:              
  Farewell! she said, and vanish'd from the place;
  The sheaf of arrows shook, and rattled in the case.
  Aghast at this, the royal virgin stood,
  Disclaim'd, and now no more a sister of the wood:

RHYME a a a

  But to the parting goddess thus she pray'd:
  Propitious still be present to my aid,
  Nor quite abandon your once favour'd maid.

RHYME a a *

  Then sighing she return'd; but smiled betwixt,
  With hopes and fears, and joys with sorrows mix'd.

RHYME a a *

    The next returning planetary hour                 
  Of Mars, who shared the heptarchy of power,
  His steps bold Arcite to the temple bent,
  To adore with Pagan rites the power armipotent:
  Then prostrate, low before his altar lay,
  And raised his manly voice, and thus began to pray:

RHYME a a *

    Strong God of arms, whose iron sceptre sways
  The freezing North, and Hyperborean seas,
  And Scythian colds, and Thracia's wintry coast,
  Where stand thy steeds, and thou art honour'd most!
  There most; but everywhere thy power is known,      
  The fortune of the fight is all thy own:
  Terror is thine, and wild amazement, flung
  From out thy chariot, withers even the strong:
  And disarray and shameful rout ensue,
  And force is added to the fainting crew.
  Acknowledged as thou art, accept my prayer,
  If aught I have achieved deserve thy care:

RHYME a a a

  If to my utmost power, with sword and shield,
  I dared the death, unknowing how to yield,
  And falling in my rank, still kept the field:       
 
RHYME a a *

 Then let my arms prevail, by thee sustain'd,
  That Emily by conquest may be gain'd.
  Have pity on my pains; nor those unknown
  To Mars, which, when a lover, were his own.
  Venus, the public care of all above,
  Thy stubborn heart has soften'd into love:
  Now, by her blandishments and powerful charms,
  When yielded she lay curling in thy arms,
  Even by thy shame, if shame it may be call'd,
  When Vulcan had thee in his net enthrall'd;         
  (Oh, envied ignominy, sweet disgrace,
  When every god that saw thee wish'd thy place!)
  By those dear pleasures, aid my arms in fight,
  And make me conquer in my patron's right:
  For I am young, a novice in the trade,
  The fool of love, unpractised to persuade:
  And want the soothing arts that catch the fair,
  But, caught myself, lie struggling in the snare:
  And she I love, or laughs at all my pain,
  Or knows her worth too well; and pays me with disdain.  
  For sure I am, unless I win in arms,
  To stand excluded from Emilia's charms:
  Nor can my strength avail, unless by thee
  Endued with force, I gain the victory!

RHYME a a *

  Then for the fire which warm'd thy generous heart,
  Pity thy subject's pains, and equal smart.
  So be the morrow's sweat and labour mine,
  The palm and honour of the conquest thine:
  Then shall the war, and stern debate, and strife
  Immortal, be the business of my life;               
  And in thy fane, the dusty spoils among,
  High on the burnish'd roof, my banner shall be hung:
  Rank'd with my champions' bucklers, and below,
  With arms reversed, the achievements of my foe:
  And while these limbs the vital spirit feeds,
  While day to night, and night to day succeeds,
  Thy smoking altar shall be fat with food
  Of incense, and the grateful steam of blood;
  Burnt-offerings morn and evening shall be thine;
  And fires eternal in thy temple shine.              
  The bush of yellow beard, this length of hair,
  Which from my birth inviolate I bear,
  Guiltless of steel, and from the razor free,
  Shall fall a plenteous crop, reserved for thee.
  So may my arms with victory be blest,
  I ask no more; let Fate dispose the rest.

RHYME a a *

    The champion ceased; there follow'd in the close
  A hollow groan: a murmuring wind arose;
  The rings of iron, that on the doors were hung,
  Sent out a jarring sound, and harshly rung:         
  The bolted gates flew open at the blast,
  The storm rush'd in, and Arcite stood aghast:
  The flames were blown aside, yet shone they bright,
  Fann'd by the wind, and gave a ruffled light.
  Then from the ground a scent began to rise,
  Sweet smelling, as accepted sacrifice:
  This omen pleased, and as the flames aspire
  With odorous incense Arcite heaps the fire:
  Nor wanted hymns to Mars, or heathen charms:
  At length the nodding statue clash'd his arms,      
  And with a sullen sound and feeble cry,
  Half sunk, and half pronounced the word of victory.
  For this, with soul devout, he thank'd the god,
  And, of success secure, return'd to his abode.

RHYME a a *

    These vows thus granted, raised a strife above,
  Betwixt the God of War and Queen of Love.
  She, granting first, had right of time to plead;
  But he had granted too, nor would recede.
  Jove was for Venus; but he fear'd his wife,
  And seem'd unwilling to decide the strife;          
  Till Saturn from his leaden throne arose,
  And found a way the difference to compose:
  Though sparing of his grace, to mischief bent,
  He seldom does a good with good intent.
  Wayward, but wise; by long experience taught,
  To please both parties, for ill ends, he sought:
  For this advantage age from youth has won,
  As not to be outridden, though outrun.
  By fortune he was now to Venus trined,
  And with stern Mars in Capricorn was join'd:        

RHYME a a *

  Of him disposing in his own abode,
  He soothed the goddess, while he gull'd the god:
  Cease, daughter, to complain, and stint the strife;
  Thy Palamon shall have his promised wife:
  And Mars, the lord of conquest, in the fight
  With palm and laurel shall adorn his knight.
  Wide is my course, nor turn I to my place,
  Till length of time, and move with tardy pace.
  Man feels me, when I press the ethereal plains,
  My hand is heavy, and the wound remains.            
  Mine is the shipwreck, in a watery sign;
  And in an earthy, the dark dungeon mine.

RHYME a a a
  
Cold shivering agues, melancholy care,
  And bitter blasting winds, and poison'd air,
  Are mine, and wilful death, resulting from despair.

RHYME a a *

  The throttling quinsey 'tis my star appoints,
  And rheumatisms ascend to rack the joints:
  When churls rebel against their native prince,
  I arm their hands, and furnish the pretence;

RHYME a a *

  And housing in the lion's hateful sign,             
  Bought senates, and deserting troops are mine.
  Mine is the privy poisoning; I command
  Unkindly seasons, and ungrateful land.
  By me kings' palaces are push'd to ground.
  And miners crush'd beneath their mines are found.
  'Twas I slew Samson, when the pillar'd hall
  Fell down, and crush'd the many with the fall.
  My looking is the sire of pestilence,
  That sweeps at once the people and the prince.
  Now weep no more, but trust thy grandsire's art,    
  Mars shall be pleased, and thou perform thy part.
  'Tis ill, though different your complexions are,
  The family of heaven for men should war.
  The expedient pleased, where neither lost his right;
  Mars had the day, and Venus had the night.
  The management they left to Chronos' care;
  Now turn we to the effect, and sing the war.

RHYME a a *

    In Athens all was pleasure, mirth, and play,
  All proper to the spring, and spritely May:
  Which every soul inspired with such delight,        
  'Twas jesting all the day, and love at night.
  Heaven smiled, and gladded was the heart of man;
  And Venus had the world as when it first began.
  At length in sleep their bodies they compose,
  And dreamt the future fight, and early rose.

RHYME a a *

    Now scarce the dawning day began to spring,
  As at a signal given, the streets with clamours ring:

RHYME a a a
  
At once the crowd arose; confused and high,
  Even from the heaven, was heard a shouting cry;
  For Mars was early up, and roused the sky.          

RHYME a a *

  The gods came downward to behold the wars,
  Sharpening their sights, and leaning from their stars.
  The neighing of the generous horse was heard,
  For battle by the busy groom prepared:
  Rustling of harness, rattling of the shield,
  Clattering of armour, furbish'd for the field.
  Crowds to the castle mounted up the street,
  Battering the pavement with their coursers' feet:

RHYME a a *

  The greedy sight might there devour the gold
  Of glittering arms, too dazzling to behold:         
  And polish'd steel, that cast the view aside,
  And crested morions, with their plumy pride.
  Knights, with a long retinue of their squires,
  In gaudy liveries march, and quaint attires.
  One laced the helm, another held the lance:
  A third the shining buckler did advance.
  The courser paw'd the ground with restless feet,
  And snorting foam'd, and champ'd the golden bit.

RHYME a a a  

The smiths and armourers on palfreys ride,
  Files in their hands, and hammers at their side,    
  And nails for loosen'd spears, and thongs for shields provide.

RHYME a a *  

The yeomen guard the streets, in seemly bands;
  And clowns come crowding on, with cudgels in their hands.

RHYME a a *

    The trumpets, next the gate, in order placed,
  Attend the sign to sound the martial blast;
  The palace-yard is fill'd with floating tides,
  And the last comers bear the former to the sides.
  The throng is in the midst: the common crew
  Shut out, the hall admits the better few;
  In knots they stand, or in a rank they walk,        
  Serious in aspect, earnest in their talk;
  Factious, and favouring this or the other side,
  As their strong fancy or weak reason guide:
  Their wagers back their wishes; numbers hold
  With the fair freckled king, and beard of gold:
  So vigorous are his eyes, such rays they cast,
  So prominent his eagle's beak is placed.
  But most their looks on the black monarch bend,
  His rising muscles, and his brawn commend;
  His double-biting axe, and beamy spear,             
  Each asking a gigantic force to rear.
  All spoke as partial favour moved the mind;
  And, safe themselves, at others' cost divined.

RHYME a a *

    Waked by the cries, the Athenian chief arose,
  The knightly forms of combat to dispose;
  And passing through the obsequious guards, he sate
  Conspicuous on a throne, sublime in state;
  There, for the two contending knights he sent;
  Arm'd cap-a-pie, with reverence low they bent;
  He smiled on both, and with superior look           
  Alike their offer'd adoration took.
  The people press on every side to see
  Their awful prince, and hear his high decree.
  Then signing to their heralds with his hand,
  They gave his orders from their lofty stand.
  Silence is thrice enjoin'd; then thus aloud
  The king-at-arms bespeaks the knights and listening crowd:

RHYME a a *

    Our sovereign lord has ponder'd in his mind
  The means to spare the blood of gentle kind;
  And of his grace, and inborn clemency,              
  He modifies his first severe decree!
  The keener edge of battle to rebate,
  The troops for honour fighting, not for hate:
  He wills, not death should terminate their strife,
  And wounds, if wounds ensue, be short of life:
  But issues, ere the fight, his dread command,
  That slings afar, and poniards hand to hand,
  Be banish'd from the field; that none shall dare
  With shorten'd sword to stab in closer war;
  But in fair combat fight with manly strength,       
  Nor push with biting point, but strike at length;

RHYME a a *

  The tourney is allow'd but one career,
  Of the tough ash, with the sharp-grinded spear;
  But knights unhorsed may rise from off the plain,
  And fight on foot their honour to regain;
  Nor, if at mischief taken, on the ground
  Be slain, but prisoners to the pillar bound,
  At either barrier placed; nor (captives made),
  Be freed, or arm'd anew the fight invade.
  The chief of either side, bereft of life,           
  Or yielded to his foe, concludes the strife.
  Thus dooms the lord: now, valiant knights and young,
  Fight each his fill with swords and maces long.

RHYME a a *

    The herald ends: the vaulted firmament
  With loud acclaims and vast applause is rent:
  Heaven guard a prince so gracious and so good,
  So just, and yet so provident of blood!
  This was the general cry. The trumpets sound,
  And warlike symphony is heard around.
  The marching troops through Athens take their way,  
  The great earl-marshal orders their array.
  The fair from high the passing pomp behold;
  A rain of flowers is from the windows roll'd.
  The casements are with golden tissue spread,
  And horses' hoofs, for earth, on silken tapestry tread.
  The king goes midmost, and the rivals ride
  In equal rank, and close his either side.

RHYME a a *

  Next after these, there rode the royal wife,
  With Emily, the cause, and the reward of strife.
  The following cavalcade, by three and three,        
  Proceed by titles marshall'd in degree.
  Thus through the southern gate they take their way,
  And at the list arrived ere prime of day.
  There, parting from the king, the chiefs divide,
  And wheeling east and west, before their many ride.
  The Athenian monarch mounts his throne on high,
  And after him the queen and Emily:
  Next these, the kindred of the crown are graced
  With nearer seats, and lords by ladies placed.
  Scarce were they seated, when with clamours loud    
  In rush'd at once a rude promiscuous crowd;
  The guards, and then each other overbear,
  And in a moment throng the spacious theatre.
  Now changed the jarring noise to whispers low,
  As winds forsaking seas more softly blow;
  When at the western gate, on which the car
  Is placed aloft, that bears the god of war,
  Proud Arcite entering arm'd before his train,
  Stops at the barrier, and divides the plain.
  Red was his banner, and display'd abroad            
  The bloody colours of his patron god.

RHYME a a *

    At that self moment enters Palamon
  The gate of Venus, and the rising Sun;
  Waved by the wanton winds, his banner flies,
  All maiden white, and shares the people's eyes.
  From east to west, look all the world around,
  Two troops so match'd were never to be found;
  Such bodies built for strength, of equal age,
  In stature sized; so proud in equipage:
  The nicest eye could no distinction make,           
  Where lay the advantage, or what side to take.

RHYME a a *

    Thus ranged, the herald for the last proclaims
  A silence, while they answer'd to their names:
  For so the king decreed, to shun the care,
  The fraud of musters false, the common bane of war.
  The tale was just, and then the gates were closed;
  And chief to chief, and troop to troop opposed.
  The heralds last retired, and loudly cried--
  The fortune of the field be fairly tried!

RHYME a a a

    At this, the challenger with fierce defy          
  His trumpet sounds; the challenged makes reply;
  With clangour rings the field, resounds the vaulted sky.

RHYME a a *

  Their vizors closed, their lances in the rest,
  Or at the helmet pointed, or the crest,
  They vanish from the barrier, speed the race,
  And spurring see decrease the middle space.
  A cloud of smoke envelops either host,
  And all at once the combatants are lost:
  Darkling they join adverse, and shock unseen,
  Coursers with coursers jostling, men with men:      
  As labouring in eclipse, a while they stay,
  Till the next blast of wind restores the day.
  They look anew: the beauteous form of fight
  Is changed, and war appears a grisly sight.
  Two troops in fair array one moment show'd,
  The next, a field with fallen bodies strow'd:
  Not half the number in their seats are found;
  But men and steeds lie grovelling on the ground.
  The points of spears are stuck within the shield,
  The steeds without their riders scour the field.    
  The knights, unhorsed, on foot renew the fight;
  The glittering falchions cast a gleaming light:
  Hauberks and helms are hew'd with many a wound,
  Out spins the streaming blood and dyes the ground.

RHYME a a *

  The mighty maces with such haste descend,
  They break the bones, and make the solid armour bend.
  This thrusts amid the throng with furious force;
  Down goes, at once, the horseman and the horse:
  That courser stumbles on the fallen steed,
  And floundering throws the rider o'er his head.     
  One rolls along, a foot-ball to his foes;
  One with a broken truncheon deals his blows.
  This halting, this disabled with his wound,
  In triumph led, is to the pillar bound,
  Where by the king's award he must abide:
  There goes a captive led on the other side.
  By fits they cease; and leaning on the lance,
  Take breath a while, and to new fight advance.

RHYME a a *

    Full oft the rivals met, and neither spared
  His utmost force, and each forgot to ward.          
  The head of this was to the saddle bent,
  The other backward to the crupper sent:
  Both were by turns unhorsed; the jealous blows
  Fall thick and heavy, when on foot they close.
  So deep their falchions bite, that every stroke
  Pierced to the quick; and equal wounds they gave and took.
  Borne far asunder by the tides of men,
  Like adamant and steel they meet again.

RHYME a a a

    So when a tiger sucks the bullock's blood,
  A famish'd lion issuing from the wood               
  Roars lordly fierce, and challenges the food:

RHYME a a *

  Each claims possession, neither will obey,
  But both their paws are fasten'd on the prey;
  They bite, they tear; and while in vain they strive,
  The swains come arm'd between, and both to distance drive.

RHYME a a *

    At length, as Fate foredoom'd, and all things tend
  By course of time to their appointed end;
  So when the sun to west was far declined,
  And both afresh in mortal battle join'd,
  The strong Emetrius came in Arcite's aid,           
  And Palamon with odds was overlaid:
  For turning short, he struck with all his might
  Full on the helmet of the unwary knight.
  Deep was the wound; he stagger'd with the blow,
  And turn'd him to his unexpected foe;
  Whom with such force he struck, he fell'd him down,
  And cleft the circle of his golden crown.
  But Arcite's men, who now prevail'd in fight,
  Twice ten at once surround the single knight:
  O'erpower'd, at length, they force him to the ground,   
  Unyielded as he was, and to the pillar bound;
  And King Lycurgus, while he fought in vain
  His friend to free, was tumbled on the plain.

RHYME a a *

    Who now laments but Palamon, compell'd
  No more to try the fortune of the field!
  And, worse than death, to view with hateful eyes
  His rival's conquest, and renounce the prize!

RHYME a a *

    The royal judge, on his tribunal placed,
  Who had beheld the fight from first to last,
  Bade cease the war; pronouncing from on high,       
  Arcite of Thebes had won the beauteous Emily.

RHYME a a a 

 The sound of trumpets to the voice replied,
  And round the royal lists the heralds cried,
  Arcite of Thebes has won the beauteous bride!

RHYME a a *

    The people rend the skies with vast applause;
  All own the chief, when Fortune owns the cause.
  Arcite is own'd even by the gods above,
  And conquering Mars insults the Queen of Love.
  So laugh'd he, when the rightful Titan fail'd,
  And Jove's usurping arms in heaven prevail'd.       
  Laugh'd all the powers who favour tyranny;
  And all the standing army of the sky.
  But Venus with dejected eyes appears,
  And, weeping on the lists, distill'd her tears;
  Her will refused, which grieves a woman most,
  And, in her champion foil'd, the cause of Love is lost.
  Till Saturn said, Fair daughter, now be still,
  The blustering fool has satisfied his will;
  His boon is given; his knight has gain'd the day,
  But lost the prize; the arrears are yet to pay;     
  Thy hour is come, and mine the care shall be
  To please thy knight, and set thy promise free.

RHYME a a *

    Now while the heralds run the lists around,
  And Arcite! Arcite! heaven and earth resound;
  A miracle (nor less it could be call'd)
  Their joy with unexpected sorrow pall'd.
  The victor knight had laid his helm aside,
  Part for his ease, the greater part for pride;
  Bare-headed, popularly low he bow'd,
  And paid the salutations of the crowd.              
  Then spurring at full speed, ran endlong on
  Where Theseus sate on his imperial throne;
  Furious he drove, and upward cast his eye,
  Where, next the queen, was placed his Emily;
  Then passing, to the saddle-bow he bent:
  A sweet regard the gracious virgin lent;
  (For women, to the brave an easy prey,
  Still follow Fortune where she leads the way):
 
RHYME a a *

 Just then, from earth sprung out a flashing fire,
  By Pluto sent, at Saturn's bad desire:              
  The startling steed was seized with sudden fright,
  And, bounding, o'er the pommel cast the knight:
  Forward he flew, and pitching on his head,
  He quiver'd with his feet, and lay for dead.
  Black was his countenance in a little space,
  For all the blood was gather'd in his face.
  Help was at hand: they rear'd him from the ground,
  And from his cumbrous arms his limbs unbound;
  Then lanced a vein, and watch'd returning breath;
  It came, but clogg'd with symptoms of his death.    
  The saddle-bow the noble parts had press'd,
  All bruised and mortified his manly breast.
  Him still entranced, and in a litter laid,
  They bore from field, and to his bed convey'd.
  At length he waked, and with a feeble cry,
  The word he first pronounced was "Emily."

RHYME a a *

    Mean time the king, though inwardly he mourn'd,
  In pomp triumphant to the town return'd,
  Attended by the chiefs, who fought the field;
  (Now friendly mix'd, and in one troop compell'd.)   
  Composed his looks to counterfeited cheer,
  And bade them not for Arcite's life to fear.
  But that which gladded all the warrior train,
  Though most were sorely wounded, none were slain.
  The surgeons soon despoil'd them of their arms,
  And some with salves they cure, and some with charms;
  Foment the bruises, and the pains assuage,
  And heal their inward hurts with sovereign draughts of sage.
  The king in person visits all around,
  Comforts the sick, congratulates the sound;         
  Honours the princely chiefs, rewards the rest,
  And holds for thrice three days a royal feast.
  None was disgraced; for falling is no shame;
  And cowardice alone is loss of fame.
  The venturous knight is from the saddle thrown;
  But 'tis the fault of Fortune, not his own,
  If crowds and palms the conquering side adorn,
  The victor under better stars was born:
  The brave man seeks not popular applause,
  Nor, overpower'd with arms, deserts his cause;      
  Unshamed, though foil'd, he does the best he can;
  Force is of brutes, but honour is of man.

RHYME a a *

    Thus Theseus smiled on all with equal grace,
  And each was set according to his place;
  With ease were reconciled the differing parts,
  For envy never dwells in noble hearts.
  At length they took their leave, the time expired,
  Well pleased, and to their several homes retired.

RHYME a a *

    Mean while the health of Arcite still impairs;
  From bad proceeds to worse, and mocks the leech's cares 
  Swoln is his breast; his inward pains increase,
  All means are used, and all without success.
  The clotted blood lies heavy on his heart,
  Corrupts, and there remains, in spite of art:
  Nor breathing veins, nor cupping will prevail;
  All outward remedies and inward fail:
  The mould of nature's fabric is destroy'd,
  Her vessels discomposed, her virtue void;

RHYME a a a

  The bellows of his lungs begin to swell:
  All out of frame is every secret cell,              
  Nor can the good receive, nor bad expel.

RHYME a a *

  Those breathing organs thus within oppress'd,
  With venom soon distend the sinews of his breast.
  Nought profits him to save abandon'd life,
  Nor vomit's upward aid, nor downward laxative.
  The midmost region batter'd and destroy'd,
  When nature cannot work, the effect of art is void.
  For physic can but mend our crazy state,
  Patch an old building, not a new create.
  Arcite is doom'd to die in all his pride,           
  Must leave his youth, and yield his beauteous bride,
  Gain'd hardly, against right, and unenjoy'd.
  When 'twas declared all hope of life was past,
  Conscience (that of all physic works the last)
  Caused him to send for Emily in haste.
  With her, at his desire, came Palamon;
  Then on his pillow raised, he thus begun:

RHYME a a *

    No language can express the smallest part
  Of what I feel, and suffer in my heart
  For you, whom best I love and value most;           
  But to your service I bequeath my ghost;
  Which from this mortal body when untied,
  Unseen, unheard, shall hover at your side;
  Nor fright you waking, nor your sleep offend,
  But wait officious, and your steps attend:
  How I have loved, excuse my faltering tongue,
  My spirit's feeble, and my pains are strong:
  This I may say, I only grieve to die,
  Because I lose my charming Emily:
  To die, when Heaven had put you in my power,        
  Fate could not choose a more malicious hour!
  What greater curse could envious Fortune give,
  Than just to die, when I began to live?

RHYME a a *

  Vain men! how vanishing a bliss we crave,
  Now warm in love, now withering in the grave!
  Never, oh never more to see the sun!
  Still dark, in a damp vault, and still alone!
  This fate is common; but I lose my breath;
  Near bliss, and yet not bless'd before my death.
  Farewell; but take me dying in your arms,           
  'Tis all I can enjoy of all your charms:
  This hand I cannot but in death resign;
  Ah! could I live! but while I live 'tis mine.
  I feel my end approach, and thus embraced,
  Am pleased to die; but hear me speak my last:
  Ah! my sweet foe, for you, and you alone,
  I broke my faith with injured Palamon.
  But love the sense of right and wrong confounds,
  Strong love and proud ambition have no bounds.
  And much I doubt, should Heaven my life prolong,    
  I should return to justify my wrong:

RHYME a a *

  For while my former flames remain within,
  Repentance is but want of power to sin.
  With mortal hatred I pursued his life,
  Nor he, nor you, were guilty of the strife;
  Nor I, but as I loved; yet all combined,
  Your beauty, and my impotence of mind;
  And his concurrent flame that blew my fire;
  For still our kindred souls had one desire.
  He had a moment's right in point of time;           
  Had I seen first, then his had been the crime.
  Fate made it mine, and justified his right;
  Nor holds this earth a more deserving knight,
  For virtue, valour, and for noble blood,
  Truth, honour, all that is comprised in good;
  So help me Heaven, in all the world is none
  So worthy to be loved as Palamon.
  He loves you too, with such an holy fire,
  As will not, cannot, but with life expire:
  Our vow'd affections both have often tried,         
  Nor any love but yours could ours divide.
  Then, by my love's inviolable band,
  By my long suffering, and my short command,
  If e'er you plight your vows when I am gone,
  Have pity on the faithful Palamon.

RHYME a a *

    This was his last; for Death came on amain,
  And exercised below his iron reign;
  Then upward to the seat of life he goes:
  Sense fled before him, what he touch'd he froze:
  Yet could he not his closing eyes withdraw,         
  Though less and less of Emily he saw;
  So, speechless, for a little space he lay;
  Then grasp'd the hand he held, and sigh'd his soul away.

RHYME a a *

    But whither went his soul, let such relate
  Who search the secrets of the future state:
  Divines can say but what themselves believe;
  Strong proofs they have, but not demonstrative:
  For, were all plain, then all sides must agree,
  And faith itself be lost in certainty.
  To live uprightly, then, is sure the best,          
  To save ourselves, and not to damn the rest.
  The soul of Arcite went where heathens go,
  Who better live than we, though less they know.

RHYME a a *

    In Palamon a manly grief appears;
  Silent, he wept, ashamed to show his tears:
  Emilia shriek'd but once, and then, oppress'd
  With sorrow, sunk upon her lover's breast:
  Till Theseus in his arms convey'd with care,
Far from so sad a sight, the swooning fair.

RHYME a a a

  'Twere loss of time her sorrow to relate;           
  Ill bears the sex a youthful lover's fate,
  When just approaching to the nuptial state.

RHYME a a *

  But like a low-hung cloud, it rains so fast,
  That all at once it falls, and cannot last.
  The face of things is changed, and Athens now,
  That laugh'd so late, becomes the scene of woe:
  Matrons and maids, both sexes, every state,
  With tears lament the knight's untimely fate.
  Nor greater grief in falling Troy was seen
  For Hector's death; but Hector was not then,        
  Old men with dust deform'd their hoary hair,
  The women beat their breasts, their cheeks they tear.
  Why wouldst thou go, with one consent they cry,
  When thou hadst gold enough, and Emily?

RHYME a a *

    Theseus himself, who should have cheer'd the grief
  Of others, wanted now the same relief;
  Old Egeus only could revive his son,
  Who various changes of the world had known,
  And strange vicissitudes of human fate,
  Still altering, never in a steady state;            
  Good after ill, and, after pain, delight,
  Alternate like the scenes of day and night:
  Since every man who lives, is born to die,
  And none can boast sincere felicity,
  With equal mind, what happens, let us bear,
  Nor joy, nor grieve too much for things beyond our care.
  Like pilgrims to the appointed place we tend;
  The world's an inn, and death the journey's end.
  Even kings but play; and when their part is done,
  Some other, worse or better, mount the throne.      
  With words like these the crowd was satisfied,
  And so they would have been, had Theseus died.

RHYME a a a
  
But he, their king, was labouring in his mind,
  A fitting place for funeral pomps to find,
  Which were in honour of the dead design'd.

RHYME a a *

  And after long debate, at last he found
  (As love itself had mark'd the spot of ground)
  That grove for ever green, that conscious laund,
  Where he with Palamon fought hand to hand:
  That where he fed his amorous desires               
  With soft complaints, and felt his hottest fires;
  There other flames might waste his earthly part,
  And burn his limbs, where love had burn'd his heart.

RHYME a a *

    This once resolved, the peasants were enjoin'd
  Sere-wood, and firs, and dodder'd oaks to find.
  With sounding axes to the grove they go,
  Fell, split, and lay the fuel on a row,
  Vulcanian food: a bier is next prepared,
  On which the lifeless body should be rear'd,
  Cover'd with cloth of gold, on which was laid       
  The corpse of Arcite, in like robes array'd.
  White gloves were on his hands, and on his head
  A wreath of laurel, mix'd with myrtle spread.
  A sword keen-edged within his right he held,
  The warlike emblem of the conquer'd field:
  Bare was his manly visage on the bier:
  Menaced his countenance; even in death severe.
  Then to the palace-hall they bore the knight,
  To lie in solemn state, a public sight.
  Groans, cries, and howlings fill the crowded place, 
  And unaffected sorrow sate on every face.
  
RHYME a a *

Sad Palamon above the rest appears,
  In sable garments, dew'd with gushing tears:
  His auburn locks on either shoulder flow'd,
  Which to the funeral of his friend he vow'd:
  But Emily, as chief, was next his side,
  A virgin-widow, and a mourning bride.
  And that the princely obsequies might be
  Perform'd according to his high degree,
 
RHYME a a a

 The steed, that bore him living to the fight,       
  Was trapp'd with polish'd steel, all shining bright,
  And cover'd with the achievements of the knight.

RHYME a a *

  The riders rode abreast, and one his shield,
  His lance of cornel-wood another held;
  The third his bow, and, glorious to behold,
  The costly quiver, all of burnish'd gold.
  The noblest of the Grecians next appear,
  And, weeping, on their shoulders bore the bier;
  With sober pace they march'd, and often stay'd,
  And through the master-street the corpse convey'd.  
  The houses to their tops with black were spread,
  And even the pavements were with mourning hid.
  The right side of the pall old Egeus kept,
  And on the left the royal Theseus wept;
  Each bore a golden bowl, of work divine,
  With honey fill'd, and milk, and mix'd with ruddy wine.
  Then Palamon, the kinsman of the slain,
  And after him appear'd the illustrious train.
  To grace the pomp, came Emily the bright,
  With cover'd fire, the funeral pile to light.       
  With high devotion was the service made,
  And all the rites of Pagan honour paid:
  So lofty was the pile, a Parthian bow,
  With vigour drawn, must send the shaft below.

RHYME a a *

  The bottom was full twenty fathom broad,
  With crackling straw beneath in due proportion strew'd.
  The fabric seem'd a wood of rising green,
  With sulphur and bitumen cast between,
  To feed the flames: the trees were unctuous fir,
  And mountain-ash, the mother of the spear;          
  The mourner-yew, and builder oak were there;
  The beech, the swimming alder, and the plane,
  Hard box, and linden of a softer grain,
  And laurels, which the gods for conquering chiefs ordain.
  How they were rank'd, shall rest untold by me,
  With nameless Nymphs that lived in every tree;
  Nor how the Dryads, or the woodland train,
  Disherited, ran howling o'er the plain:
  Nor how the birds to foreign seats repair'd,
  Or beasts, that bolted out, and saw the forest bared:   
  Nor how the ground, now clear'd, with ghastly fright
  Beheld the sudden sun, a stranger to the light.

RHYME a a *

    The straw, as first I said, was laid below;
  Of chips and sere-wood was the second row;
  The third of greens, and timber newly fell'd;
  The fourth high stage the fragrant odours held,
  And pearls, and precious stones, and rich array;
  In midst of which, embalm'd, the body lay.
  The service sung, the maid with mourning eyes
  The stubble fired; the smouldering flames arise:    
  This office done, she sunk upon the ground;
  But what she spoke, recover'd from her swound,
  I want the wit in moving words to dress;
  But by themselves the tender sex may guess.
  While the devouring fire was burning fast,
  Rich jewels in the flame the wealthy cast;

RHYME a a *

  And some their shields, and some their lances threw,
  And gave their warrior's ghost a warrior's due.

RHYME a a a
 
 Full bowls of wine, of honey, milk, and blood
  Were pour'd upon the pile of burning wood,          
  And hissing flames receive, and hungry lick the food.

RHYME a a *

  Then thrice the mounted squadrons ride around
  The fire, and Arcite's name they thrice resound:
  Hail, and farewell! they shouted thrice amain,
  Thrice facing to the left, and thrice they turn'd again:
  Still as they turn'd, they beat their clattering shields;
  The women mix their cries; and clamour fills the fields.
  The warlike wakes continued all the night,
  And funeral games were play'd at new returning light;
  Who naked wrestled best, besmear'd with oil,  
  Or who with gauntlets gave or took the foil,
  I will not tell you, nor would you attend;
  But briefly haste to my long story's end.

RHYME a a *

    I pass the rest; the year was fully mourn'd,
  And Palamon long since to Thebes returned:
  When, by the Grecians' general consent,
  At Athens Theseus held his parliament:
  Among the laws that pass'd, it was decreed,
  That conquer'd Thebes from bondage should be freed;
  Reserving homage to the Athenian throne,      
  To which the sovereign summon'd Palamon.
  Unknowing of the cause, he took his way,
  Mournful in mind, and still in black array.

RHYME a a *

    The monarch mounts the throne, and, placed on high,
  Commands into the court the beauteous Emily:
  So call'd, she came; the senate rose, and paid
  Becoming reverence to the royal maid.
  And first, soft whispers through the assembly went;
  With silent wonder then they watch'd the event:
  All hush'd, the king arose with awful grace,  
  Deep thought was in his breast, and counsel in his face.
  At length he sigh'd; and having first prepared
  The attentive audience, thus his will declared:

RHYME a a *

    The Cause and Spring of motion, from above,
  Hung down on earth the golden chain of Love:
  Great was the effect, and high was his intent,
  When peace among the jarring seeds he sent.
  Fire, flood, and earth, and air by this were bound,
  And Love, the common link, the new creation crown'd.
  The chain still holds; for though the forms decay,
  Eternal matter never wears away:
  The same First Mover certain bounds has placed,
  How long those perishable forms shall last:
  Nor can they last beyond the time assign'd
  By that all-seeing, and all-making mind:
  Shorten their hours they may; for will is free;
  But never pass the appointed destiny.
  So men oppress'd, when weary of their breath,
  Throw off the burden, and suborn their death.
  Then since those forms begin, and have their end, 
  On some unalter'd cause they sure depend:
  Parts of the whole are we; but God the whole;
  Who gives us life, and animating soul.
  For nature cannot from a part derive
  That being, which the whole can only give:
  He perfect, stable; but imperfect we,
  Subject to change, and different in degree;
  Plants, beasts, and man; and as our organs are,
  We more or less of his perfection share.

RHYME a a *

  But by a long descent, the ethereal fire      
  Corrupts; and forms, the mortal part, expire:
  As he withdraws his virtue, so they pass,
  And the same matter makes another mass:
  This law the Omniscient Power was pleased to give,
  That every kind should by succession live:
  That individuals die, His will ordains;
  The propagated species still remains.
  The monarch oak, the patriarch of the trees,
  Shoots rising up, and spreads by slow degrees;
  Three centuries he grows, and three he stays, 
  Supreme in state, and in three more decays:
  So wears the paving pebble in the street,
  And towns and towers their fatal periods meet:
  So rivers, rapid once, now naked lie,
  Forsaken of their springs; and leave their channels dry.
  So man, at first a drop, dilates with heat,
  Then, form'd, the little heart begins to beat;
  Secret he feeds, unknowing in the cell;
  At length, for hatching ripe, he breaks the shell,
  And struggles into breath, and cries for aid; 
  Then, helpless, in his mother's lap is laid:
  He creeps, he walks, and issuing into man,
  Grudges their life, from whence his own began:

RHYME a a *

  Reckless of laws, affects to rule alone,
  Anxious to reign, and restless on the throne:
  First vegetive, then feels, and reasons last;
  Rich of three souls, and lives all three to waste.
  Some thus; but thousands more in flower of age:
  For few arrive to run the latter stage.
  Sunk in the first, in battle some are slain,  
  And others whelm'd beneath the stormy main.
  What makes all this, but Jupiter the king,
  At whose command we perish, and we spring?
  Then 'tis our best, since thus ordain'd to die,
  To make a virtue of necessity.
  Take what he gives, since to rebel is vain;
  The bad grows better, which we well sustain;
  And could we choose the time, and choose aright,
  'Tis best to die, our honour at the height.
  When we have done our ancestors no shame,     
  But served our friends, and well secured our fame;
  Then should we wish our happy life to close,
  And leave no more for fortune to dispose:
  So should we make our death a glad relief
  From future shame, from sickness, and from grief:
  Enjoying while we live the present hour,
  And dying in our excellence and flower.
  Then round our death-bed every friend should run,
  And joyous of our conquest early won:

RHYME a a *

  While the malicious world with envious tears  
  Should grudge our happy end, and wish it theirs.

RHYME a a a
 
 Since then our Arcite is with honour dead,
  Why should we mourn, that he so soon is freed,
  Or call untimely, what the gods decreed?

RHYME a a *

  With grief as just, a friend may be deplored
  From a foul prison to free air restored.
  Ought he to thank his kinsman or his wife,
  Could tears recall him into wretched life?
  Their sorrow hurts themselves; on him is lost;
  And worse than both, offends his happy ghost. 
  What then remains, but, after past annoy,
  To take the good vicissitude of joy?
  To thank the gracious gods for what they give,
  Possess our souls, and while we live, to live?
  Ordain we then two sorrows to combine,
  And in one point the extremes of grief to join;
  That thence resulting joy may be renew'd,
  As jarring notes in harmony conclude.
  Then I propose that Palamon shall be
  In marriage join'd with beauteous Emily;      

RHYME a a *

  For which already I have gain'd the assent
  Of my free people in full parliament.
  Long love to her has borne the faithful knight,
  And well deserved, had fortune done him right:
  'Tis time to mend her fault; since Emily
  By Arcite's death from former vows is free:
  If you, fair sister, ratify the accord,
  And take him for your husband, and your lord,
  'Tis no dishonour to confer your grace
  On one descended from a royal race:           
  And were he less, yet years of service past,
  From grateful souls exact reward at last:
  Pity is Heaven's and yours; nor can she find
  A throne so soft as in a woman's mind.
  He said; she blush'd; and as o'er-awed by might,
  Seem'd to give Theseus what she gave the knight.
  Then turning to the Theban thus he said:
  Small arguments are needful to persuade

RHYME a a *

  Your temper to comply with my command;
  And speaking thus, he gave Emilia's hand.     

RHYME a a a

  Smiled Venus, to behold her own true knight
  Obtain the conquest, though he lost the fight;
  And bless'd with nuptial bliss the sweet laborious night.

RHYME a a *

  Eros, and Anteros, on either side,
  One fired the bridegroom, and one warm'd the bride;
  And long-attending Hymen from above,
  Shower'd on the bed the whole Idalian grove.
  All of a tenor was their after-life,
  No day discolour'd with domestic strife;
  No jealousy, but mutual truth believed,       
  Secure repose, and kindness undeceived.
  Thus Heaven, beyond the compass of his thought,
  Sent him the blessing he so dearly bought.

RHYME a a *

    So may the Queen of Love long duty bless,
  And all true lovers find the same success!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  There lived, as authors tell, in days of yore,
  A widow somewhat old, and very poor:
  Deep in a cell her cottage lonely stood,
  Well thatch'd, and under covert of a wood.
  This dowager, on whom my tale I found,
  Since last she laid her husband in the ground,
  A simple sober life, in patience, led,
  And had but just enough to buy her bread:
  But huswifing the little Heaven had lent,
  She duly paid a groat for quarter rent;                   
  And pinch'd her belly, with her daughters two,
  To bring the year about with much ado.

RHYME a a *

    The cattle in her homestead were three sows,
  A ewe call'd Mally, and three brinded cows.
  Her parlour-window stuck with herbs around,
  Of savoury smell; and rushes strew'd the ground.
  A mapple-dresser in her hall she had,
  On which full many a slender meal she made;
  For no delicious morsel pass'd her throat;
  According to her cloth she cut her coat:                  
  No poignant sauce she knew, nor costly treat,
  Her hunger gave a relish to her meat:
  A sparing diet did her health assure;
  Or sick, a pepper posset was her cure.
  Before the day was done, her work she sped,
  And never went by candlelight to bed:
  With exercise she sweat ill humours out,
  Her dancing was not hindered by the gout.
  Her poverty was glad; her heart content;
  Nor knew she what the spleen or vapours meant.            
  Of wine she never tasted through the year,
  But white and black was all her homely cheer:
  Brown bread, and milk (but first she skimm'd her bowls),
  And rashers of singed bacon on the coals;
  On holy days, an egg or two at most;
  But her ambition never reach'd to roast.

RHYME a a *

    A yard she had with pales enclosed about,
  Some high, some low, and a dry ditch without.
  Within this homestead lived, without a peer
  For crowing loud, the noble Chanticleer;                  
  So hight her cock, whose singing did surpass
  The merry notes of organs at the mass.
  More certain was the crowing of the cock
  To number hours, than is an abbey-clock;
  And sooner than the matin-bell was rung,
  He clapp'd his wings upon his roost, and sung:
  For when degrees fifteen ascended right,
  By sure instinct he knew 'twas one at night.
  High was his comb, and coral-red withal,
  In dents embattled like a castle wall;                    
  His bill was raven-black, and shone like jet;
  Blue were his legs, and orient were his feet;
  White were his nails, like silver to behold,
  His body glittering like the burnish'd gold.
  This gentle cock, for solace of his life,
  Six misses had, besides his lawful wife.
  Scandal that spares no king, though ne'er so good,
  Says, they were all of his own flesh and blood,
  His sisters both by sire and mother's side;
  And sure their likeness show'd them near allied.          
  But make the worst, the monarch did no more,
  Than all the Ptolemys had done before:
  When incest is for interest of a nation,
  'Tis made no sin by holy dispensation.
  Some lines have been maintain'd by this alone,
  Which by their common ugliness are known.

RHYME a a *

    But passing this, as from our tale apart,
  Dame Partlet was the sovereign of his heart:
  Ardent in love, outrageous in his play,
  He feather'd her a hundred times a day:                   
  And she, that was not only passing fair,
  But was with all discreet, and debonair,
  Resolved the passive doctrine to fulfil,
  Though loth; and let him work his wicked will:

RHYME a a a

  At board and bed was affable and kind,
  According as their marriage vow did bind,
  And as the Church's precept had enjoin'd.

RHYME a a a

  Even since she was a se'ennight old, they say,
  Was chaste and humble to her dying day,
  Nor chick nor hen was known to disobey.                   

RHYME a a *

    By this her husband's heart she did obtain;
  What cannot beauty, join'd with virtue, gain!
  She was his only joy, and he her pride,
  She, when he walk'd, went pecking by his side;
  If spurning up the ground, he sprung a corn,
  The tribute in his bill to her was borne.
  But oh! what joy it was to hear him sing
  In summer, when the day began to spring,
  Stretching his neck, and warbling in his throat;
  _Solus cum sola_ then was all his note.                   
  For in the days of yore, the birds of parts
  Were bred to speak, and sing, and learn the liberal arts.

RHYME a a *

    It happ'd that, perching on the parlour-beam
  Amidst his wives, he had a deadly dream,
  Just at the dawn; and sigh'd, and groan'd so fast,
  As every breath he drew would be his last.
  Dame Partlet, ever nearest to his side,
  Heard all his piteous moan, and how he cried
  For help from gods and men: and sore aghast
  She peck'd and pull'd, and waken'd him at last.     
  Dear heart, said she, for love of heaven declare
  Your pain, and make me partner in your care!
  You groan, sir, ever since the morning-light,
  As something had disturb'd your noble sprite.

RHYME a a *

    And, madam, well I might, said Chanticleer;
  Never was shrovetide cock in such a fear.
  Even still I run all over in a sweat,
  My princely senses not recover'd yet.
  For such a dream I had, of dire portent,
  That much I fear my body will be shent:             
  It bodes I shall have wars and woful strife,
  Or in a loathsome dungeon end my life.

RHYME a a a

  Know, dame, I dreamt within my troubled breast,
  That in our yard I saw a murderous beast,
  That on my body would have made arrest.

RHYME a a *

  With waking eyes I ne'er beheld his fellow;
  His colour was betwixt a red and yellow:
  Tipp'd was his tail, and both his pricking ears
  Were black; and much unlike his other hairs:
  The rest, in shape a beagle's whelp throughout,     
  With broader forehead, and a sharper snout:
  Deep in his front were sunk his glowing eyes,
  That yet, methinks, I see him with surprise.
  Reach out your hand, I drop with clammy sweat,
  And lay it to my heart, and feel it beat.
  Now fie, for shame, quoth she; by Heaven above,
  Thou hast for ever lost thy lady's love!
  No woman can endure a recreant knight,
  He must be bold by day, and free by night:
  Our sex desires a husband or a friend,              
  Who can our honour and his own defend.
  Wise, hardy, secret, liberal of his purse:
  A fool is nauseous, but a coward worse:
  No bragging coxcomb, yet no baffled knight.
  How darest thou talk of love, and darest not fight?
  How darest thou tell thy dame thou art affear'd?
  Hast thou no manly heart, and hast a beard?

RHYME a a *

    If aught from fearful dreams may be divined,
  They signify a cock of dunghill kind.
  All dreams, as in old Galen I have read,            
  Are from repletion and complexion bred;
  From rising fumes of indigested food,
  And noxious humours that infect the blood:
  And sure, my lord, if I can read aright,
  These foolish fancies you have had to-night
  Are certain symptoms (in the canting style)
  Of boiling choler, and abounding bile;
  This yellow gall, that in your stomach floats,
  Engenders all these visionary thoughts.
  When choler overflows, then dreams are bred         
  Of flames, and all the family of red;
  Red dragons, and red beasts, in sleep we view,
  For humours are distinguish'd by their hue.
  From hence we dream of wars and warlike things,
  And wasps and hornets with their double wings.

RHYME a a *

  Choler adust congeals our blood with fear,
  Then black bulls toss us, and black devils tear.
  In sanguine airy dreams, aloft we bound;
  With rheums oppress'd, we sink in rivers drown'd.
  More I could say, but thus conclude my theme,       
  The dominating humour makes the dream.
  Cato was in his time accounted wise,
  And he condemns them all for empty lies.

RHYME a a a

  Take my advice, and when we fly to ground,
  With laxatives preserve your body sound,
  And purge the peccant humours that abound.

RHYME a a *

  I should be loath to lay you on a bier;
  And though there lives no pothecary near,
  I dare for once prescribe for your disease,
  And save long bills, and a damn'd doctor's fees.    
  Two sovereign herbs, which I by practice know,
  And both at hand (for in our yard they grow),
  On peril of my soul shall rid you wholly
  Of yellow choler, and of melancholy:
  You must both purge, and vomit; but obey,
  And for the love of heaven make no delay.

RHYME a a *

  Since hot and dry in your complexion join,
  Beware the sun when in a vernal sign;
  For when he mounts exalted in the Ram,
  If then he finds your body in a flame,              
  Replete with choler, I dare lay a groat,
  A tertian ague is at least your lot.
  Perhaps a fever (which the gods forefend!)
  May bring your youth to some untimely end:
  And therefore, sir, as you desire to live,
  A day or two before your laxative,
  Take just three worms, nor under nor above,
  Because the gods unequal numbers love,
  These digestives prepare you for your purge;
  Of fumetory, centaury, and spurge,                  
  And of ground ivy add a leaf or two,--
  All which within our yard or garden grow.
  Eat these, and be, my lord, of better cheer;
  Your father's son was never born to fear.

RHYME a a *

    Madam, quoth he, gramercy for your care,
  But Cato, whom you quoted, you may spare:
  'Tis true, a wise and worthy man he seems,
  And (as you say) gave no belief to dreams:
  But other men of more authority,
  And, by the immortal powers! as wise as he,         
  Maintain, with sounder sense, that dreams forebode;
  For Homer plainly says they come from God.
  Nor Cato said it: but some modern fool
  Imposed in Cato's name on boys at school.
  Believe me, madam, morning dreams foreshow
  The events of things, and future weal or woe:
  Some truths are not by reason to be tried,
  But we have sure experience for our guide.
  An ancient author, equal with the best,
  Relates this tale of dreams among the rest.         

RHYME a a *

    Two friends or brothers, with devout intent,
  On some far pilgrimage together went.
  It happen'd so that, when the sun was down,
  They just arrived by twilight at a town;
  That day had been the baiting of a bull,
  'Twas at a feast, and every inn so full,
  That no void room in chamber, or on ground,
  And but one sorry bed was to be found:
  And that so little it would hold but one,
  Though till this hour they never lay alone.         
  So were they forced to part; one staid behind,
  His fellow sought what lodging he could find:
  At last he found a stall where oxen stood,
  And that he rather chose than lie abroad.
  'Twas in a farther yard without a door;
  But, for his ease, well litter'd was the floor.
  His fellow, who the narrow bed had kept,
  Was weary, and without a rocker slept:

RHYME a a *

  Supine he snored; but in the dead of night
  He dream'd his friend appear'd before his sight,    
  Who, with a ghastly look and doleful cry,
  Said, Help me, brother, or this night I die:
  Arise, and help, before all help be vain,
  Or in an ox's stall I shall be slain.
  Roused from his rest, he waken'd in a start,
  Shivering with horror, and with aching heart;

RHYME a a a

  At length to cure himself by reason tries;
  'Tis but a dream, and what are dreams but lies?
  So thinking, changed his side, and closed his eyes.

RHYME a a a

  His dream returns; his friend appears again:        
  The murderers come, now help, or I am slain:
  'Twas but a vision still, and visions are but vain.

RHYME a a *

  He dream'd the third: but now his friend appear'd
  Pale, naked, pierced with wounds, with blood besmear'd:
  Thrice warn'd, awake, said he; relief is late,
  The deed is done; but thou revenge my fate:

RHYME a a *

  Tardy of aid, unseal thy heavy eyes;
  Awake, and with the dawning day arise:
  Take to the western gate thy ready way,
  For by that passage they my corpse convey:          
  My corpse is in a tumbril laid, among
  The filth and ordure, and enclosed with dung;
  That cart arrest, and raise a common cry;
  For sacred hunger of my gold, I die:
  Then show'd his grisly wound; and last he drew
  A piteous sigh, and took a long adieu.

RHYME a a *

    The frighted friend arose by break of day,
  And found the stall where late his fellow lay.
  Then of his impious host inquiring more,
  Was answer'd that his guest was gone before:        
  Muttering he went, said he, by morning light,
  And much complain'd of his ill rest by night.

RHYME a a a

  This raised suspicion in the pilgrim's mind;
  Because all hosts are of an evil kind,
  And oft to share the spoils with robbers join'd.

RHYME a a *

    His dream confirm'd his thought: with troubled look
  Straight to the western gate his way he took:
  There, as his dream foretold, a cart he found,
  That carried compost forth to dung the ground.
  This when the pilgrim saw, he stretch'd his throat, 
  And cried out murder with a yelling note.
  My murder'd fellow in this cart lies dead,
  Vengeance and justice on the villain's head;
  You, magistrates, who sacred laws dispense,
  On you I call to punish this offence.

RHYME a a *

    The word thus given, within a little space
  The mob came roaring out, and throng'd the place.

RHYME a a a

  All in a trice they cast the cart to ground,
  And in the dung the murder'd body found;
  Though breathless, warm, and reeking from the wound.

RHYME a a *

  Good Heaven, whose darling attribute we find
  Is boundless grace and mercy to mankind,            
  Abhors the cruel; and the deeds of night
  By wondrous ways reveals in open light:
  Murder may pass unpunish'd for a time,
  But tardy justice will o'ertake the crime.

RHYME a a *

  And oft a speedier pain the guilty feels;
  The hue and cry of Heaven pursues him at the heels,

RHYME a a a

  Fresh from the fact; as in the present case,
  The criminals are seized upon the place:            
  Carter and host confronted face to face.

RHYME a a *

  Stiff in denial, as the law appoints,
  On engines they distend their tortured joints:
  So was confession forced, the offence was known,
  And public justice on the offenders done.

RHYME a a b b c c c

    Here may you see that visions are to dread;
  And in the page that follows this, I read
  Of two young merchants, whom the hope of gain
  Induced in partnership to cross the main:
  Waiting till willing winds their sails supplied,    
  Within a trading town they long abide,
  Full fairly situate on a haven's side.

RHYME a a *

    One evening it befell, that, looking out,
  The wind they long had wish'd was come about:
  Well pleased, they went to rest; and if the gale
  Till morn continued, both resolved to sail.
  But as together in a bed they lay,
  The younger had a dream at break of day.
  A man he thought stood frowning at his side:
  Who warn'd him for his safety to provide,           
  Nor put to sea, but safe on shore abide.
  I come, thy Genius, to command thy stay;
  Trust not the winds, for fatal is the day,
  And death unhoped attends the watery way.
  The vision said; and vanish'd from his sight:
  The dreamer waken'd in a mortal fright:

RHYME a a *

  Then pull'd his drowsy neighbour, and declared
  What in his slumber he had seen and heard.
  His friend smiled scornful, and with proud contempt
  Rejects as idle what his fellow dreamt.             
  Stay, who will stay: for me no fears restrain,
  Who follow Mercury, the god of gain;
  Let each man do as to his fancy seems,
  I wait, not I, till you have better dreams.

RHYME a a *

  Dreams are but interludes which fancy makes;
  When monarch Reason sleeps, this mimic wakes:
  Compounds a medley of disjointed things,
  A mob of cobblers, and a court of kings:
  Light fumes are merry, grosser fumes are sad:
  Both are the reasonable soul run mad:               
  And many monstrous forms in sleep we see,
  That neither were, nor are, nor e'er can be.
  Sometimes forgotten things, long cast behind,
  Rush forward in the brain, and come to mind.
  The nurse's legends are for truths received,
  And the man dreams but what the boy believed.

RHYME a a a b b c c 

    Sometimes we but rehearse a former play,
  The night restores our actions done by day;
  As hounds in sleep will open for their prey.
  In short, the farce of dreams is of a piece:        
  Chimeras all; and more absurd, or less:
  You, who believe in tales, abide alone;
  Whate'er I get this voyage is my own.

RHYME a a *

    Thus while he spoke, he heard the shouting crew
  That call'd aboard, and took his last adieu.
  The vessel went before a merry gale,
  And for quick passage put on every sail:
  But when least fear'd, and even in open day,
  The mischief overtook her in the way:
  Whether she sprung a leak, I cannot find,           
  Or whether she was overset with wind,
  Or that some rock below her bottom rent;
  But down at once with all her crew she went:
  Her fellow ships from far her loss descried;
  But only she was sunk, and all were safe beside.

RHYME a a *

    By this example you are taught again,
  That dreams and visions are not always vain:
  But if, dear Partlet, you are still in doubt,
  Another tale shall make the former out.

RHYME a a *

    Kenelm, the son of Kenulph, Mercia's king,        
  Whose holy life the legends loudly sing,
  Warn'd in a dream, his murder did foretell
  From point to point as after it befell:
  All circumstances to his nurse he told,
  (A wonder from a child of seven years old):

RHYME a a *

  The dream with horror heard, the good old wife
  From treason counsell'd him to guard his life;
  But close to keep the secret in his mind,
  For a boy's vision small belief would find.
  The pious child, by promise bound, obey'd,          
  Nor was the fatal murder long delay'd:
  By Quenda slain, he fell before his time,
  Made a young martyr by his sister's crime.
  The tale is told by venerable Bede,
  Which, at your better leisure, you may read.

RHYME a a *

    Macrobius, too, relates the vision sent
  To the great Scipio, with the famed event:
  Objections makes, but after makes replies,
  And adds, that dreams are often prophecies.

RHYME a a a b b c c d d 

    Of Daniel you may read in holy writ,              
  Who, when the king his vision did forget,
  Could word for word the wondrous dream repeat.
  Nor less of patriarch Joseph understand,
  Who by a dream enslaved the Egyptian land,
  The years of plenty and of dearth foretold,
  When, for their bread, their liberty they sold.
  Nor must the exalted butler be forgot,
  Nor he whose dream presaged his hanging lot.

RHYME a a b b c c c 

    And did not Croesus the same death foresee,
  Raised in his vision on a lofty tree?               
  The wife of Hector, in his utmost pride,
  Dream'd of his death the night before he died;
  Well was he warn'd from battle to refrain,
  But men to death decreed are warn'd in vain:
  He dared the dream, and by his fatal foe was slain.

RHYME a a *

    Much more I know, which I forbear to speak,
  For, see, the ruddy day begins to break;
  Let this suffice, that plainly I foresee
  My dream was bad, and bodes adversity:
  But neither pills nor laxatives I like,             
  They only serve to make the well-man sick:
  Of these his gain the sharp physician makes,
  And often gives a purge, but seldom takes:
  They not correct, but poison all the blood,
  And ne'er did any but the doctors good.
  Their tribe, trade, trinkets, I defy them all;
  With every work of pothecary's hall.
  These melancholy matters I forbear:
  But let me tell thee, Partlet mine, and swear,
  That when I view the beauties of thy face,          
  I fear not death, nor dangers, nor disgrace:

RHYME a a b b b 

  So may my soul have bliss, as when I spy
  The scarlet red about thy partridge eye,
  While thou art constant to thy own true knight,
  While thou art mine, and I am thy delight,
  All sorrows at thy presence take their flight.

RHYME a a *

  For true it is, as _in principio,
  Mulier est hominis confusio_.
  Madam, the meaning of this Latin is,
  That woman is to man his sovereign bliss.           
  For when by night I feel your tender side,
  Though for the narrow perch I cannot ride,

RHYME a a *

  Yet I have such a solace in my mind,
  That all my boding cares are cast behind;
  And even already I forget my dream.
  He said, and downward flew from off the beam;
  For daylight now began apace to spring,
  The thrush to whistle, and the lark to sing;
  Then, crowing, clapp'd his wings, the appointed call,
  To chuck his wives together in the hall.            

RHYME a a *

    By this the widow had unbarr'd the door,
  And Chanticleer went strutting out before.
  With royal courage, and with heart so light,
  As show'd he scorned the visions of the night.
  Now roaming in the yard, he spurn'd the ground,
  And gave to Partlet the first grain he found;

RHYME a a *

  Then often feather'd her with wanton play,
  And trod her twenty times ere prime of day;
  And took by turns, and gave, so much delight,
  Her sisters pined with envy at the sight.           
  He chuck'd again, when other corns he found,
  And scarcely deign'd to set a foot to ground;
  But swagger'd like a lord about his hall,
  And his seven wives came running at his call.

RHYME a a *

    'Twas now the month in which the world began,
  (If March beheld the first created man):
  And since the vernal equinox, the sun,
  In Aries twelve degrees, or more, had run;
  When, casting up his eyes against the light,
  Both month, and day, and hour he measured right;    
  And told more truly than the Ephemeris:
  For art may err, but nature cannot miss.
  Thus numbering times and seasons in his breast,
  His second crowing the third hour confess'd.
  Then turning, said to Partlet, See, my dear,
  How lavish nature has adorn'd the year;

RHYME a a *

  How the pale primrose and blue violet spring,
  And birds essay their throats disused to sing:
  All these are ours; and I with pleasure see
  Man strutting on two legs, and aping me:            
  An unfledged creature, of a lumpish frame,
  Endow'd with fewer particles of flame;
  Our dame sits cowering o'er a kitchen fire,
  I draw fresh air, and nature's works admire:
  And even this day in more delight abound,
  Than, since I was an egg, I ever found.

RHYME a a b b b c c 

    The time shall come when Chanticleer shall wish
  His words unsaid, and hate his boasted bliss:
  The crested bird shall by experience know,
  Jove made not him his masterpiece below;            
  And learn the latter end of joy is woe.
  The vessel of his bliss to dregs is run,
  And Heaven will have him taste his other tun.

RHYME a a *

    Ye wise, draw near, and hearken to my tale,
  Which proves that oft the proud by flattery fall:
  The legend is as true, I undertake,
  As Tristran is, and Launcelot of the lake:
  Which all our ladies in such reverence hold,
  As if in Book of Martyrs it were told.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e e 

    A fox, full-fraught with seeming sanctity,        
  That fear'd an oath, but, like the devil, would lie;
  Who look'd like Lent, and had the holy leer,
  And durst not sin before he said his prayer;
  This pious cheat, that never suck'd the blood,
  Nor chew'd the flesh of lambs, but when he could,
  Had pass'd three summers in the neighbouring wood:
  And musing long, whom next to circumvent,
  On Chanticleer his wicked fancy bent;
  And in his high imagination cast,
  By stratagem, to gratify his taste.                 

RHYME a a *

      The plot contrived, before the break of day
  Saint Reynard through the hedge had made his way;
  The pale was next, but proudly with a bound
  He leapt the fence of the forbidden ground:
  Yet fearing to be seen, within a bed
  Of coleworts he conceal'd his wily head;
  Then skulk'd till afternoon, and watch'd his time
  (As murderers use) to perpetrate his crime.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e f f 

    Oh, hypocrite, ingenious to destroy!
  Oh, traitor, worse than Sinon was to Troy!          
  Oh, vile subverter of the Gallic reign,
  More false than Gano was to Charlemagne!
  Oh, Chanticleer, in an unhappy hour
  Didst thou forsake the safety of thy bower!
  Better for thee thou hadst believed thy dream,
  And not that day descended from the beam.
  But here the doctors eagerly dispute:
  Some hold predestination absolute;
  Some clerks maintain, that Heaven at first foresees,
  And in the virtue of foresight decrees.             

RHYME a a *

  If this be so, then prescience binds the will,
  And mortals are not free to good or ill;
  For what he first foresaw, he must ordain,
  Or its eternal prescience may be vain:
  As bad for us as prescience had not been:
  For first, or last, he's author of the sin.
  And who says that, let the blaspheming man
  Say worse even of the devil, if he can.
  For how can that Eternal Power be just
  To punish man, who sins because he must?            
  Or, how can he reward a virtuous deed,
  Which is not done by us; but first decreed?

RHYME a a b b c c d d 

    I cannot bolt this matter to the bran,
  As Bradwardin and holy Austin can;
  If prescience can determine actions so
  That we must do, because he did foreknow,
  Or that, foreknowing, yet our choice is free,
  Not forced to sin by strict necessity;
  This strict necessity they simple call,
  Another sort there is conditional.                  

RHYME a a b b b c c d d e e 

  The first so binds the will, that things foreknown
  By spontaneity, not choice, are done.
  Thus galley-slaves tug willing at their oar,
  Content to work, in prospect of the shore;
  But would not work at all if not constrain'd before.
  That other does not liberty constrain,
  But man may either act, or may refrain.
  Heaven made us agents free to good or ill,
  And forced it not, though he foresaw the will.
  Freedom was first bestow'd on human race,           
  And prescience only held the second place.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e e f f 

    If he could make such agents wholly free,
  I not dispute, the point's too high for me;
  For Heaven's unfathom'd power what man can sound,
  Or put to his Omnipotence a bound?
  He made us to his image, all agree;
  That image is the soul, and that must be,
  Or not, the Maker's image, or be free.
  But whether it were better man had been
  By nature bound to good, not free to sin,           
  I waive, for fear of splitting on a rock,
  The tale I tell is only of a cock;
  Who had not run the hazard of his life,
  Had he believed his dream, and not his wife:

RHYME a a *

  For women, with a mischief to their kind,
  Pervert with bad advice our better mind.
  A woman's counsel brought us first to woe,
  And made her man his paradise forego,
  Where at heart's ease he lived; and might have been
  As free from sorrow as he was from sin.             
  For what the devil had their sex to do,
  That, born to folly, they presumed to know,
  And could not see the serpent in the grass?
  But I myself presume, and let it pass.

RHYME a a *

    Silence in times of suffering is the best,
  'Tis dangerous to disturb an hornet's nest.
  In other authors you may find enough,
  But all they say of dames is idle stuff:            
  Legends of lying wits together bound,
  The Wife of Bath would throw them to the ground;
  These are the words of Chanticleer, not mine;
  I honour dames, and think their sex divine.

RHYME a a b b c c c 

    Now to continue what my tale begun:
  Lay Madam Partlet basking in the sun,
  Breast-high in sand: her sisters in a row
  Enjoy'd the beams above, the warmth below;
  The cock, that of his flesh was ever free,
  Sung merrier than the mermaid in the sea:
  And so befell, that as he cast his eye

RHYME a b b c c d d e e f f 

  Among the coleworts on a butterfly,                 
  He saw false Reynard where he lay full low:
  I need not swear he had no list to crow:
  But cried _cock, cock_, and gave a sudden start,
  As sore dismay'd, and frighted at his heart:
  For birds and beasts, inform'd by nature, know
  Kinds opposite to theirs, and fly their foe;
  So Chanticleer, who never saw a fox,
  Yet shunn'd him as a sailor shuns the rocks.
  But the false loon, who could not work his will
  But open force, employ'd his flattering skill;      

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

  I hope, my lord, said he, I not offend;
  Are you afraid of me, that am your friend?
  I were a beast indeed to do you wrong,
  I, who have loved and honour'd you so long:
  Stay, gentle sir, nor take a false alarm,
  For, on my soul, I never meant you harm.
  I come no spy, nor as a traitor press,
  To learn the secrets of your soft recess:
  Far be from Reynard so profane a thought,
  But by the sweetness of your voice was brought:     

RHYME a a b b c c c 

  For, as I bid my beads, by chance I heard
  The song as of an angel in the yard;
  A song that would have charm'd the infernal gods,
  And banish'd horror from the dark abodes:
  Had Orpheus sung it in the nether sphere,
  So much the hymn had pleased the tyrant's ear,
  The wife had been detain'd, to keep the husband there.

RHYME a a b b c c 

    My lord, your sire familiarly I knew,
  A peer deserving such a son as you:
  He, with your lady-mother (whom Heaven rest!)       
  Has often graced my house, and been my guest;
  To view his living features does me good,
  For I am your poor neighbour in the wood;

RHYME a a b b c c d d d 

  And in my cottage should be proud to see
  The worthy heir of my friend's family.
  But since I speak of singing, let me say,
  As with an upright heart I safely may,
  That, save yourself, there breathes not on the ground
  One like your father for a silver sound.
  So sweetly would he wake the winter day,            
  That matrons to the church mistook their way,
  And thought they heard the merry organ play.

RHYME a a *

  And he, to raise his voice, with artful care,
  (What will not beaux attempt to please the fair?)
  On tiptoe stood to sing with greater strength,
  And stretch'd his comely neck at all the length:
  And while he strain'd his voice to pierce the skies,
  As saints in raptures use, would shut his eyes,

RHYME a a *

  That the sound striving through the narrow throat,
  His winking might avail to mend the note,           
  By this, in song, he never had his peer,
  From sweet Cecilia down to Chanticleer;
  Nor Maro's muse, who sung the mighty Man,
  Nor Pindar's heavenly lyre, nor Horace when a swan.
  Your ancestors proceed from race divine:
  From Brennus and Belinus is your line;
  Who gave to sovereign Rome such loud alarms,
  That even the priests were not excused from arms.

RHYME a a *

    Besides, a famous monk of modern times
  Has left of cocks recorded in his rhymes,           
  That of a parish priest the son and heir
  (When sons of priests were from the proverb clear),
  Affronted once a cock of noble kind,
  And either lamed his legs, or struck him blind;
  For which the clerk his father was disgraced,
  And in his benefice another placed.
  Now sing, my lord, if not for love of me,
  Yet for the sake of sweet Saint Charity;
  Make hills and dales, and earth and heaven rejoice,
  And emulate your father's angel-voice.              

RHYME a a *

    The cock was pleased to hear him speak so fair,
  And proud beside, as solar people are;
  Nor could the treason from the truth descry,
  So was he ravish'd with this flattery;
  So much the more, as from a little elf
  He had a high opinion of himself;
  Though sickly, slender, and not large of limb,
  Concluding all the world was made for him.

RHYME a a *

    Ye princes, raised by poets to the gods,
  And Alexander'd[g b ] up in lying odes!               
  Believe not every flattering knave's report,
  There's many a Reynard lurking in the court;
  And he shall be received with more regard,
  And listen'd to, than modest truth is heard.

RHYME a a *

    This Chanticleer, of whom the story sings,
  Stood high upon his toes, and clapp'd his wings;
  Then stretch'd his neck, and wink d with both his eyes,
  Ambitious as he sought the Olympic prize.
  But while he pain'd himself to raise his note,
  False Renyard rush'd and caught him by the throat.  
  Then on his back he laid the precious load,
  And sought his wonted shelter of the wood;
  Swiftly he made his way the mischief done,
  Of all unheeded, and pursued by none.

RHYME a a *

    Alas, what stay is there in human state!
  Or who can shun inevitable fate?
  The doom was written, the decree was pass'd,
  Ere the foundations of the world were cast!
  In Aries though the sun exalted stood,
  His patron-planet, to procure his good;             
  Yet Saturn was his mortal foe, and he,
  In Libra raised, opposed the same degree:
  The rays both good and bad, of equal power,
  Each thwarting other, made a mingled hour.

RHYME a a *

    On Friday morn he dreamt this direful dream,
  Cross to the worthy native, in his scheme!
  Ah, blissful Venus, Goddess of delight!
  How couldst thou suffer thy devoted knight
  On thy own day to fall by foe oppress'd,
  The wight of all the world who served thee best?    

RHYME a a *

  Who, true to love, was all for recreation,
  And minded not the work of propagation.
  Ganfride,[g c ] who couldst so well in rhyme complain
  The death of Richard with an arrow slain,
  Why had not I thy muse, or thou my heart,
  To sing this heavy dirge with equal art?
  That I, like thee, on Friday might complain;
  For on that day was Coeur de Lion slain.

RHYME a a b b b c c d d e e 

    Not louder cries, when Ilium was in flames,
  Were sent to Heaven by woful Trojan dames,          
  When Pyrrhus toss'd on high his burnish'd blade,
  And offer'd Priam to his father's shade,
  Than for the cock the widow'd poultry made.
  Fair Partlet first, when he was borne from sight,
  With sovereign shrieks bewail'd her captive knight:
  Far louder than the Carthaginian wife,
  When Asdrubal, her husband, lost his life;
  When she beheld the smouldering flames ascend,
  And all the Punic glories at an end:

RHYME a a *

  Willing into the fires she plunged her head,        
  With greater ease than others seek their bed.
  Not more aghast the matrons of renown,
  When tyrant Nero burn'd the imperial town,
  Shriek'd for the downfall in a doleful cry,
  For which their guiltless lords were doom'd to die.

RHYME a a *

    Now to my story I return again:
  The trembling widow, and her daughters twain,
  This woful cackling cry with horror heard,
  Of those distracted damsels in the yard;
  And starting up beheld the heavy sight,             
  How Reynard to the forest took his flight,
  And 'cross his back, as in triumphant scorn,
  The hope and pillar of the house was borne.

RHYME a a *

    The fox! the wicked fox! was all the cry;
  Out from his house ran every neighbour nigh:
  The vicar first, and after him the crew,
  With forks and staves the felon to pursue.
  Ran Coll our dog, and Talbot with the band,
  And Malkin, with her distaff in her hand:
  Ran cow and calf, and family of hogs,               
  In panic horror of pursuing dogs;
  With many a deadly grunt and doleful squeak,
  Poor swine, as if their pretty hearts would break.

RHYME a a *

  The shouts of men, the women in dismay,
  With shrieks augment the terror of the day.
  The ducks that heard the proclamation cried,
  And fear'd a persecution might betide,
  Full twenty miles from town their voyage take,
  Obscure in rushes of the liquid lake.
  The geese fly o'er the barn; the bees in arms       
  Drive headlong from their waxen cells in swarms.
  Jack Straw at London-stone, with all his rout,
  Struck not the city with so loud a shout;

RHYME a a b b b c c d d 

  Not when, with English hate, they did pursue
  A Frenchman, or an unbelieving Jew:
  Not when the welkin rung with 'one and all;'
  And echoes bounded back from Fox's hall:
  Earth seem'd to sink beneath, and heaven above to fall.
  With might and main they chased the murderous fox,
  With brazen trumpets, and inflated box,             
  To kindle Mars with military sounds,
  Nor wanted horns to inspire sagacious hounds.

RHYME a a *

    But see how Fortune can confound the wise,
  And when they least expect it, turn the dice!
  The captive-cock, who scarce could draw his breath,
  And lay within the very jaws of death;
  Yet in this agony his fancy wrought,
  And fear supplied him with this happy thought:

RHYME a a b b c c c d d 

    Yours is the prize, victorious prince! said he,
  The vicar my defeat, and all the village see.       
  Enjoy your friendly fortune while you may,
  And bid the churls that envy you the prey
  Call back their mongrel curs, and cease their cry,
  See, fools, the shelter of the wood is nigh,
  And Chanticleer in your despite shall die,
  He shall be pluck'd and eaten to the bone.
    'Tis well advised, in faith it shall be done;

RHYME a a *

  This Reynard said: but as the word he spoke,
  The prisoner with a spring from prison broke;
  Then stretch'd his feather'd fans with all his might,   
  And to the neighbouring maple wing'd his flight;
  Whom, when the traitor safe on tree beheld,
  He cursed the gods, with shame and sorrow fill'd:
  Shame for his folly, sorrow out of time,
  For plotting an unprofitable crime;
  Yet mastering both, the artificer of lies
  Renews the assault, and his last battery tries.

RHYME a a *

    Though I, said he, did ne'er in thought offend,
  How justly may my lord suspect his friend?
  The appearance is against me, I confess,            
  Who seemingly have put you in distress:
  You, if your goodness does not plead my cause,
  May think I broke all hospitable laws,
  To bear you from your palace-yard by might,
  And put your noble person in a fright:

RHYME a a b b c c c d d 

  This, since you take it ill, I must repent,
  Though, Heaven can witness, with no bad intent:
  I practised it, to make you taste your cheer
  With double pleasure, first prepared by fear.
  So loyal subjects often seize their prince,         
  Forced (for his good) to seeming violence,
  Yet mean his sacred person not the least offence.
  Descend; so help me Jove, as you shall find,
  That Reynard comes of no dissembling kind.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d 

    Nay, quoth the Cock, but I beshrew us both,
  If I believe a saint upon his oath:
  An honest man may take a knave's advice,
  But idiots only may be cozen'd twice:
  Once warn'd is well bewared; no nattering lies
  Shall soothe me more to sing with winking eyes,     
  And open mouth, for fear of catching flies.
  Who blindfold walks upon a river's brim,
  When he should see, has he deserved to swim?

RHYME a a b b c c 

    Better, Sir Cock, let all contention cease,
  Come down, said Reynard, let us treat of peace.
  A peace with all my soul, said Chanticleer;
  But, with your favour, I will treat it here:
  And, lest the truce with treason should be mix'd,
  'Tis my concern to have the tree betwixt.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d e e e 

    In this plain fable you the effect may see        
  Of negligence, and fond credulity:
  And learn besides of flatterers to beware,
  Then most pernicious when they speak too fair.
  The cock and fox, the fool and knave imply;
  The truth is moral, though the tale a lie.
  Who spoke in parables, I dare not say;
  But sure he knew it was a pleasing way,
  Sound sense, by plain example, to convey.
  And in a heathen author we may find,
  That pleasure with instruction should be join'd;    
  So take the corn, and leave the chaff behind.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d 

  Now turning from the wintry signs, the sun,
  His course exalted, through the Ram had run,
  And whirling up the skies, his chariot drove
  Through Taurus, and the lightsome realms of love;
  Where Venus from her orb descends in showers,
  To glad the ground, and paint the fields with flowers:
  When first the tender blades of grass appear,
  And buds, that yet the blast of Eurus fear,
  Stand at the door of life, and doubt to clothe the year:

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Till gentle heat, and soft repeated rains,                
  Make the green blood to dance within their veins:
  Then, at their call, embolden'd out they come,
  And swell the gems, and burst the narrow room;
  Broader and broader yet, their blooms display,
  Salute the welcome sun, and entertain the day.
  Then from their breathing souls the sweets repair
  To scent the skies, and purge the unwholesome air:
  Joy spreads the heart, and, with a general song,
  Spring issues out, and leads the jolly months along.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e f f f 

    In that sweet season, as in bed I lay,                  
  And sought in sleep to pass the night away,
  I turn'd my weary side, but still in vain,
  Though full of youthful health, and void of pain:
  Cares I had none, to keep me from my rest,
  For love had never enter'd in my breast;
  I wanted nothing fortune could supply,
  Nor did she slumber till that hour deny.
  I wonder'd then, but after found it true,
  Much joy had dried away the balmy dew:
  Seas would be pools, without the brushing air             
  To curl the waves; and sure some little care
  Should weary nature so, to make her want repair.

RHYME a a b b b c c d d e e f f 

    When Chanticleer the second watch had sung,
  Scorning the scorner sleep, from bed I sprung;
  And dressing, by the moon, in loose array,
  Pass'd out in open air, preventing day,
  And sought a goodly grove, as fancy led my way.
  Straight as a line in beauteous order stood
  Of oaks unshorn a venerable wood;
  Fresh was the grass beneath, and every tree,              
  At distance planted in a due degree,
  Their branching arms in air with equal space
  Stretch'd to their neighbours with a long embrace:
  And the new leaves on every bough were seen,
  Some ruddy colour'd, some of lighter green.

RHYME a a *

  The painted birds, companions of the spring,
  Hopping from spray to spray, were heard to sing.
  Both eyes and ears received a like delight,
  Enchanting music, and a charming sight.
  On Philomel I fix'd my whole desire,                      
  And listen'd for the queen of all the quire;
  Fain would I hear her heavenly voice to sing;
  And wanted yet an omen to the spring.

RHYME a a *

    Attending long in vain, I took the way
  Which through a path but scarcely printed lay;
  In narrow mazes oft it seem'd to meet,
  And look'd as lightly press'd by fairy feet.
  Wandering I walk'd alone, for still methought
  To some strange end so strange a path was wrought:
  At last it led me where an arbour stood,                  
  The sacred receptacle of the wood:

RHYME a a *

  This place unmark'd, though oft I walk'd the green,
  In all my progress I had never seen:
  And seized at once with wonder and delight,
  Gazed all around me, new to the transporting sight.
  'Twas bench'd with turf, and goodly to be seen,
  The thick young grass arose in fresher green:
  The mound was newly made, no sight could pass
  Betwixt the nice partitions of the grass,
  The well-united sods so closely lay;                      
  And all around the shades defended it from day;

RHYME a a *

  For sycamores with eglantine were spread,
  A hedge about the sides, a covering overhead.
  And so the fragrant brier was wove between,
  The sycamore and flowers were mixed with green,
  That nature seem'd to vary the delight,
  And satisfied at once the smell and sight.
  The master workman of the bower was known
  Through fairy-lands, and built for Oberon;
  Who twining leaves with such proportion drew,             
  They rose by measure, and by rule they grew;
  No mortal tongue can half the beauty tell;
  For none but hands divine could work so well.
  Both roof and sides were like a parlour made,
  A soft recess, and a cool summer shade;

RHYME a a *

  The hedge was set so thick, no foreign eye
  The persons placed within it could espy;
  But all that pass'd without with ease was seen,
  As if nor fence nor tree was placed between.
  'Twas border'd with a field; and some was plain           
  With grass, and some was sow'd with rising grain.
  That (now the dew with spangles deck'd the ground)
  A sweeter spot of earth was never found.

RHYME a a *

  I look'd, and look'd, and still with new delight;
  Such joy my soul, such pleasures fill'd my sight;
  And the fresh eglantine exhaled a breath,
  Whose odours were of power to raise from death.
  Nor sullen discontent, nor anxious care,
  Even though brought thither, could inhabit there:
  But thence they fled as from their mortal foe;      
  For this sweet place could only pleasure know.

RHYME a a *

    Thus as I mused, I cast aside my eye,
  And saw a medlar-tree was planted nigh.
  The spreading branches made a goodly show,
  And full of opening blooms was every bough:
  A goldfinch there I saw, with gaudy pride
  Of painted plumes, that hopp'd from side to side,
  Still pecking as she pass'd; and still she drew
  The sweets from every flower, and suck'd the dew:
  Sufficed at length, she warbled in her throat,      
  And tuned her voice to many a merry note,
  But indistinct, and neither sweet nor clear,
  Yet such as soothed my soul, and pleased my ear.

RHYME a a *

    Her short performance was no sooner tried,
  When she I sought, the nightingale, replied:
  So sweet, so shrill, so variously she sung,
  That the grove echoed, and the valleys rung;
  And I so ravish'd with her heavenly note,
  I stood entranced, and had no room for thought,
  But all o'er-power'd with ecstasy of bliss,         
  Was in a pleasing dream of paradise.
  At length I waked, and looking round the bower,
  Search'd every tree, and pry'd on every flower,
  If any where by chance I might espy
  The rural poet of the melody;
  For still methought she sung not far away:
  At last I found her on a laurel spray.
  Close by my side she sat, and fair in sight,
  Full in a line, against her opposite;
  Where stood with eglantine the laurel twined;       
  And both their native sweets were well conjoin'd.

RHYME a a *

    On the green bank I sat, and listen'd long;
  (Sitting was more convenient for the song):
  Nor till her lay was ended could I move,
  But wish'd to dwell for ever in the grove.
  Only methought the time too swiftly pass'd,
  And every note I fear'd would be the last.
  My sight and smell, and hearing were employ'd,
  And all three senses in full gust enjoy'd.
  And what alone did all the rest surpass,            
  The sweet possession of the fairy place;
  Single, and conscious to myself alone
  Of pleasures to the excluded world unknown:
  Pleasures which nowhere else were to be found,
  And all Elysium in a spot of ground.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e e 

    Thus while I sat intent to see and hear,
  And drew perfumes of more than vital air,
  All suddenly I heard the approaching sound
  Of vocal music on the enchanted ground:
  A host of saints it seem'd, so full the quire;      
  As if the bless'd above did all conspire
  To join their voices, and neglect the lyre.
  At length there issued from the grove behind
  A fair assembly of the female kind:
  A train less fair, as ancient fathers tell,
  Seduced the sons of heaven to rebel.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

  I pass their form, and every charming grace,
  Less than an angel would their worth debase:
  But their attire, like liveries of a kind,
  All rich and rare, is fresh within my mind.         
  In velvet white as snow the troop was gown'd,
  The seams with sparkling emeralds set around;
  Their hoods and sleeves the same; and purfled o'er
  With diamonds, pearls, and all the shining store
  Of eastern pomp: their long descending train,
  With rubies edged, and sapphires, swept the plain:

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e e 

  High on their heads, with jewels richly set,
  Each lady wore a radiant coronet.
  Beneath the circles, all the quire was graced
  With chaplets green on their fair foreheads placed: 
  Of laurel some, of woodbine many more;
  And wreaths of Agnus castus[g e ] others bore;
  These last, who with those virgin crowns were dress'd,
  Appear'd in higher honour than the rest.
  They danced around: but in the midst was seen
  A lady of a more majestic mien;
  By stature, and by beauty mark'd their sovereign queen

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e f f g g 

    She in the midst began with sober grace;
  Her servants' eyes were fix'd upon her face;
  And as she moved or turn'd, her motions view'd,     
  Her measures kept, and step by step pursued.
  Methought she trod the ground with greater grace,
  With more of godhead shining in her face;
  And as in beauty she surpass'd the quire,
  So, nobler than the rest, was her attire.
  A crown of ruddy gold enclosed her brow,
  Plain without pomp, and rich without a show:
  A branch of Agnus castus in her hand
  She bore aloft (her sceptre of command);
  Admired, adored by all the circling crowd,          
  For wheresoe'er she turn'd her face, they bow'd:

RHYME a a b b b c c d d 

  And as she danced, a roundelay she sung,
  In honour of the laurel, ever young:
  She raised her voice on high, and sung so clear,
  The fawns came scudding from the groves to hear:
  And all the bending forest lent an ear.
  At every close she made, the attending throng
  Replied, and bore the burden of the song:
  So just, so small, yet in so sweet a note,
  It seem'd the music melted in the throat.           

RHYME a a *

    Thus dancing on, and singing as they danced,
  They to the middle of the mead advanced,
  Till round my arbour a new ring they made,
  And footed it about the sacred shade.
  O'erjoy'd to see the jolly troops so near,
  But somewhat awed, I shook with holy fear;
  Yet not so much, but what I noted well
  Who did the most in song or dance excel.

RHYME a a *

    Not long I had observed, when from afar
  I heard a sudden symphony of war;                   
  The neighing coursers, and the soldiers cry,
  And sounding trumps, that seem'd to tear the sky:
  I saw soon after this, behind the grove
  From whence the ladies did in order move,
  Come issuing out in arms a warrior train,
  That like a deluge pour'd upon the plain;

RHYME a a *

  On barbed steeds they rode in proud array,
  Thick as the college of the bees in May,
  When swarming o'er the dusky fields they fly,
  New to the flowers, and intercept the sky,          
  So fierce they drove, their coursers were so fleet,
  That the turf trembled underneath their feet.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d e e f f 

    To tell their costly furniture were long,
  The summer's day would end before the song:
  To purchase but the tenth of all their store,
  Would make the mighty Persian monarch poor.
  Yet what I can, I will; before the rest
  The trumpets issued, in white mantles dress'd,
  A numerous troop, and all their heads around
  With chaplets green of cerrial-oak[g f ] were crown'd,
  And at each trumpet was a banner bound;
  Which, waving in the wind, displayed at large
  Their master's coat of arms, and knightly charge.
  Broad were the banners, and of snowy hue,
  A purer web the silk-worm never drew.

RHYME a a *

  The chief about their necks the scutcheons wore,
  With orient pearls and jewels powder'd o'er:
  Broad were their collars too, and every one
  Was set about with many a costly stone.
  Next these, of kings-at-arms a goodly train         
  In proud array came prancing o'er the plain:
  Their cloaks were cloth of silver mix'd with gold,
  And garlands green around their temples roll'd:

RHYME a a *

  Rich crowns were on their royal scutcheons placed,
  With sapphires, diamonds, and with rubies graced:
  And as the trumpets their appearance made,
  So these in habits were alike array'd;
  But with a pace more sober, and more slow;
  And twenty, rank in rank, they rode a-row.
  The pursuivants came next, in number more;          
  And, like the heralds, each his scutcheon bore:
  Clad in white velvet all their troop they led,
  With each an oaken chaplet on his head.

RHYME a a *

    Nine royal knights in equal rank succeed,
  Each warrior mounted on a fiery steed;
  In golden armour glorious to behold;
  The rivets of their arms were nail'd with gold.
  Their surcoats of white ermine fur were made;
  With cloth of gold between, that cast a glittering shade.
  The trappings of their steeds were of the same;     
  The golden fringe even set the ground on flame,
  And drew a precious trail: a crown divine
  Of laurel did about their temples twine.

RHYME a a b b c c d d d e e 

    Three henchmen were for every knight assign'd,
  All in rich livery clad, and of a kind;
  White velvet, but unshorn, for cloaks they wore,
  And each within his hand a truncheon bore:
  The foremost held a helm of rare device;
  A prince's ransom would not pay the price.
  The second bore the buckler of his knight,          
  The third of cornel-wood a spear upright,
  Headed with piercing steel, and polish'd bright.
  Like to their lords their equipage was seen,
  And all their foreheads crown'd with garlands green.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

    And after these came, arm'd with spear and shield,
  A host so great as cover'd all the field:
  And all their foreheads, like the knights before,
  With laurels ever-green were shaded o'er,
  Or oak, or other leaves of lasting kind,
  Tenacious of the stem, and firm against the wind.   
  Some in their hands, beside the lance and shield,
  The boughs of woodbine, or of hawthorn held,
  Or branches for their mystic emblems took,
  Of palm, of laurel, and of cerrial-oak.

RHYME a a a

    Thus marching to the trumpet's lofty sound,
  Drawn in two lines adverse they wheel'd around,
  And in the middle meadow took their ground.

RHYME a a *

  Among themselves the tourney they divide,
  In equal squadrons ranged on either side.
  Then turn'd their horses' heads, and man to man,    
  And steed to steed opposed, the jousts began.
  They lightly set their lances in the rest,
  And, at the sign, against each other press'd:
  They met. I sitting at my ease beheld
  The mix'd events, and fortunes of the field.

RHYME a a *

  Some broke their spears, some tumbled horse and man,
  And round the field the lighten'd coursers ran.
  An hour and more, like tides, in equal sway
  They rush'd, and won by turns, and lost the day:

RHYME a a a

  At length the nine (who still together held)        
  Their fainting foes to shameful flight compell'd,
  And with resistless force o'er-ran the field.

RHYME a a *

  Thus, to their fame, when finish'd was the fight,
  The victors from their lofty steeds alight:
  Like them dismounted all the warlike train,
  And two by two proceeded o'er the plain,
  Till to the fair assembly they advanced,
  Who near the secret arbour sung and danced.

RHYME a a a

    The ladies left their measures at the sight,
  To meet the chiefs returning from the fight,        
  And each with open arms embraced her chosen knight.
  
RHYME a a *

  Amid the plain a spreading laurel stood,
  The grace and ornament of all the wood:
  That pleasing shade they sought, a soft retreat
  From sudden April showers, a shelter from the heat:
  Her leafy arms with such extent were spread.
  So near the clouds was her aspiring head,
  That hosts of birds, that wing the liquid air,
  Perch'd in the boughs, had nightly lodging there:
  And flocks of sheep beneath the shade from far      
  Might hear the rattling hail, and wintry war;

RHYME a a *

  From heaven's inclemency here found retreat,
  Enjoy'd the cool, and shunn'd the scorching heat:
  A hundred knights might there at ease abide;
  And every knight a lady by his side:
  The trunk itself such odours did bequeath,
  That a Moluccan[g g ] breeze to these was common breath.

RHYME a a a

  The lords and ladies here, approaching, paid
  Their homage, with a low obeisance made;
  And seem'd to venerate the sacred shade.            

RHYME a a *

  These rites perform'd, their pleasures they pursue,
  With song of love, and mix with measures new;
  Around the holy tree their dance they frame,
  And every champion leads his chosen dame.

RHYME a a *

    I cast my sight upon the farther field,
  And a fresh object of delight beheld:
  For from the region of the West I heard
  New music sound, and a new troop appear'd;
  Of knights and ladies mix'd, a jolly band,
  But all on foot they march'd, and hand in hand.     

RHYME a a a

    The ladies dress'd in rich symars were seen
  Of Florence satin, flower'd with white and green,
  And for a shade betwixt the bloomy gridelin.

RHYME a a *

  The borders of their petticoats below
  Were guarded thick with rubies on a row;
  And every damsel wore upon her head
  Of flowers a garland blended white and red.
  Attired in mantles all the knights were seen,
  That gratified the view with cheerful green:

RHYME a a *

  Their chaplets of their ladies' colours were,       
  Composed of white and red, to shade their shining hair.
  Before the merry troop the minstrels play'd;
  All in their masters' liveries were array'd,
  And clad in green, and on their temples wore
  The chaplets white and red their ladies bore.
  Their instruments were various in their kind,
  Some for the bow, and some for breathing wind;
  The sawtry, pipe, and hautboy's noisy band,
  And the soft lute trembling beneath the touching hand.

RHYME a a *

  A tuft of daisies on a flowery lea                  
  They saw, and thitherward they bent their way;
  To this both knights and dames their homage made,
  And due obeisance to the daisy paid.
  And then the band of flutes began to play,
  To which a lady sung a virelay:[g h ]
  And still at every close she would repeat
  The burden of the song, _The daisy is so sweet,
  The daisy is so sweet_: when she begun,
  The troop of knights and dames continued on.
  The concert and the voice so charm'd my ear,
  And soothed my soul, that it was heaven to hear.    

RHYME a a *

    But soon their pleasure pass'd: at noon of day
  The sun with sultry beams began to play:
  Not Sirius shoots a fiercer flame from high,
  When with his poisonous breath he blasts the sky:

RHYME a a a

  Then droop'd the fading flowers (their beauty fled)
  And closed their sickly eyes, and hung the head;
  And rivell'd up with heat, lay dying in their bed.

RHYME a a *

  The ladies gasp'd, and scarcely could respire;
  The breath they drew, no longer air but fire;       
  The fainty knights were scorch'd, and knew not where
  To run for shelter, for no shade was near;
  And after this the gathering clouds amain
  Pour'd down a storm of rattling hail and rain;
  And lightning flash'd betwixt: the field, and flowers,
  Burnt up before, were buried in the showers.

RHYME a a *

  The ladies and the knights, no shelter nigh,
  Bare to the weather and the wintry sky,
  Were drooping wet, disconsolate, and wan,
  And through their thin array received the rain;     
  While those in white, protected by the tree,
  Saw pass in vain the assault, and stood from danger free;
  But as compassion moved their gentle minds,
  When ceased the storm, and silent were the winds,

RHYME a a *

  Displeased at what, not suffering they had seen,
  They went to cheer the faction of the green.
  The queen in white array, before her band,
  Saluting, took her rival by the hand;
  So did the knights and dames, with courtly grace,
  And with behaviour sweet their foes embrace;        
  Then thus the queen with laurel on her brow--
  Fair sister, I have suffer'd in your woe;

RHYME a a *

  Nor shall be wanting aught within my power
  For your relief in my refreshing bower.
  That other answer'd with a lowly look,
  And soon the gracious invitation took:
  For ill at ease both she and all her train
  The scorching sun had borne, and beating rain.
  Like courtesy was used by all in white,
  Each dame a dame received, and every knight a knight.   

RHYME a a *

  The laurel champions with their swords invade
  The neighbouring forests, where the jousts were made,
  And serewood from the rotten hedges took,
  And seeds of latent fire, from flints provoke:
  A cheerful blaze arose, and by the fire
  They warm'd their frozen feet, and dried their wet attire.
  Refresh'd with heat, the ladies sought around
  For virtuous herbs, which, gather'd from the ground,
  They squeezed the juice, and cooling ointment made,
  Which on their sun-burnt cheeks, and their chapt skins they laid:  
  Then sought green salads, which they bade them eat,
  A sovereign remedy for inward heat.

RHYME a a *

    The Lady of the Leaf ordain'd a feast,
  And made the Lady of the Flower her guest:
  When, lo! a bower ascended on the plain,
  With sudden seats ordain'd, and large for either train.
  This bower was near my pleasant arbour placed,
  That I could hear and see whatever pass'd:
  The ladies sat with each a knight between,
  Distinguish'd by their colours, white and green;    

RHYME a a *

  The vanquish'd party with the victors join'd,
  Nor wanted sweet discourse, the banquet of the mind.
  Meantime the minstrels play'd on either side,
  Vain of their art, and for the mastery vied:
  The sweet contention lasted for an hour,
  And reach'd my secret arbour from the bower.

RHYME a a *

    The sun was set; and Vesper, to supply
  His absent beams, had lighted up the sky.
  When Philomel, officious all the day
  To sing the service of the ensuing May,             
  Fled from her laurel shade, and wing'd her flight
  Directly to the queen array'd in white:
  And, hopping, sat familiar on her hand,
  A new musician, and increased the band.

RHYME a a *

    The goldfinch, who, to shun the scalding heat,
  Had changed the medlar for a safer seat,
  And hid in bushes 'scaped the bitter shower,
  Now perch'd upon the Lady of the Flower;
  And either songster holding out their throats,
  And folding up their wings, renew'd their notes:    
  As if all day, precluding to the fight,
  They only had rehearsed, to sing by night.
  The banquet ended, and the battle done,
  They danced by star-light and the friendly moon:
  And when they were to part, the laureate queen
  Supplied with steeds the lady of the green,
  Her and her train conducting on the way,
  The moon to follow, and avoid the day.

RHYME a a *

    This when I saw, inquisitive to know
  The secret moral of the mystic show,                
  I started from my shade, in hopes to find
  Some nymph to satisfy my longing mind:
  And as my fair adventure fell, I found
  A lady all in white, with laurel crown'd,
  Who closed the rear, and softly paced along,
  Repeating to herself the former song.
  With due respect my body I inclined,
  As to some being of superior kind,
  And made my court according to the day,
  Wishing her queen and her a happy May.              
  Great thanks, my daughter, with a gracious bow,
  She said; and I, who much desired to know
  Of whence she was, yet fearful how to break
  My mind, adventured humbly thus to speak:

RHYME a a *

  Madam, might I presume and not offend,
  So may the stars and shining moon attend

RHYME a a a

  Your nightly sports, as you vouchsafe to tell,
  What nymphs they were who mortal forms excel,
  And what the knights who fought in listed fields so well.

RHYME a a *

  To this the dame replied: Fair daughter, know,      
  That what you saw was all a fairy show;
  And all those airy shapes you now behold,
  Were human bodies once, and clothed with earthly mould;
  Our souls, not yet prepared for upper light,
  Till doomsday wander in the shades of night;

RHYME a a *

  This only holiday of all the year,
  We privileged in sunshine may appear:
  With songs and dance we celebrate the day,
  And with due honours usher in the May.
  At other times we reign by night alone,             
  And posting through the skies pursue the moon;
  But when the morn arises, none are found;
  For cruel Demogorgon walks the round,
  And if he finds a fairy lag in light,
  He drives the wretch before, and lashes into night.

RHYME a a *

    All courteous are by kind; and ever proud
  With friendly offices to help the good.
  In every land we have a larger space
  Than what is known to you of mortal race;
  Where we with green adorn our fairy bowers,         
  And even this grove, unseen before, is ours.
  Know farther; every lady clothed in white,
  And, crown'd with oak and laurel every knight,
  Are servants to the Leaf, by liveries known
  Of innocence; and I myself am one.
  Saw you not her, so graceful to behold,
  In white attire, and crown'd with radiant gold?
  The sovereign lady of our land is she,
  Diana call'd, the Queen of Chastity:
  And, for the spotless name of maid she bears,       
  That Agnus castus in her hand appears;

RHYME a a *

  And all her train, with leafy chaplets crown'd,
  Were for unblamed virginity renown'd;
  But those the chief and highest in command
  Who bear those holy branches in their hand:

RHYME a a a

  The knights adorn'd with laurel crowns are they,
  Whom death nor danger ever could dismay,
  Victorious names, who made the world obey;

RHYME a a *

  Who, while they lived, in deeds of arms excell'd,
  And after death for deities were held.              
  But those who wear the woodbine on their brow,
  Were knights of love, who never broke their vow;
  Firm to their plighted faith, and ever free
  From fears and fickle chance, and jealousy.
  The lords and ladies, who the woodbine bear,
  As true as Tristram and Isotta were.

RHYME a a *

    But what are those, said I, the unconquer'd nine,
  Who, crown'd with laurel-wreaths, in golden armour shine?
  And who the knights in green, and what the train
  Of ladies dress'd with daisies on the plain?        
  Why both the bands in worship disagree,
  And some adore the flower, and some the tree?

RHYME a a *

    Just is your suit, fair daughter, said the dame:
  Those laurell'd chiefs were men of mighty fame;
  Nine worthies were they call'd of different rites,
  Three Jews, three Pagans, and three Christian knights.

RHYME a a a
 
 These, as you see, ride foremost in the field,
  As they the foremost rank of honour held,
  And all in deeds of chivalry excell'd:

RHYME a a *

  Their temples wreathed with leaves, that still renew;   
  For deathless laurel is the victor's due:
  Who bear the bows were knights in Arthur's reign,
  Twelve they, and twelve the peers of Charlemagne:
  For bows the strength of brawny arms imply,
  Emblems of valour, and of victory.

RHYME a a *

  Behold an order yet of newer date,
  Doubling their number, equal in their state;
  Our England's ornament, the crown's defence,
  In battle brave, protectors of their prince;
  Unchanged by fortune, to their sovereign true,      
  For which their manly legs are bound with blue.

RHYME a a a

  These, of the Garter call'd, of faith unstain'd,
  In fighting fields the laurel have obtain'd,
  And well repaid the honours which they gain'd.

RHYME a a *

  The laurel wreaths were first by Cesar worn,
  And still they Cesar's successors adorn:
  One leaf of this is immortality,
  And more of worth than all the world can buy.

RHYME a a *

    One doubt remains, said I, the dames in green,
  What were their qualities, and who their queen?     
  Flora commands, said she, those nymphs and knights,
  Who lived in slothful ease and loose delights;
  Who never acts of honour durst pursue,
  The men inglorious knights, the ladies all untrue:
  Who, nursed in idleness, and train'd in courts,
  Pass'd all their precious hours in plays, and sports,
  Till death behind came stalking on, unseen,
  And wither'd (like the storm) the freshness of their green.
  These, and their mates, enjoy their present hour,
  And therefore pay their homage to the Flower:       

RHYME a a a

  But knights in knightly deeds should persevere,
  And still continue what at first they were;
  Continue, and proceed in honour's fair career.

RHYME a a *

  No room for cowardice, or dull delay;
  From good to better they should urge their way.
  For this with golden spurs the chiefs are graced,
  With pointed rowels arm'd to mend their haste;

RHYME a a a

  For this with lasting leaves their brows are bound;
  For laurel is the sign of labour crown'd,
  Which bears the bitter blast, nor shaken falls to ground:

RHYME a a *

  From winter winds it suffers no decay,
  For ever fresh and fair, and every month is May.

RHYME a a *

  Even when the vital sap retreats below,
  Even when the hoary head is hid in snow,
  The life is in the Leaf, and still between
  The fits of falling snow appears the streaky green.
  Not so the Flower, which lasts for little space,
  A short-lived good, and an uncertain grace;
  This way, and that, the feeble stem is driven,
  Weak to sustain the storms and injuries of heaven.  

RHYME a a a

  Propp'd by the spring, it lifts aloft the head,
  But of a sickly beauty, soon to shed;
  In summer living, and in winter dead.

RHYME a a *

  For things of tender kind, for pleasure made,
  Shoot up with swift increase, and sudden are decay'd.

RHYME a a *

    With humble words, the wisest I could frame,
  And proffer'd service, I repaid the dame;
  That, of her grace, she gave her maid to know
  The secret meaning of this moral show.
  And she, to prove what profit I had made            
  Of mystic truth, in fables first convey'd,
  Demanded, till the next returning May,
  Whether the Leaf or Flower I would obey?
  I chose the Leaf; she smiled with sober cheer,
  And wish'd me fair adventure for the year,
  And gave me charms and sigils, for defence
  Against ill tongues that scandal innocence:
  But I, said she, my fellows must pursue,
  Already past the plain, and out of view.

RHYME a a a b b 

    We parted thus; I homeward sped my way,           
  Bewilder'd in the wood till dawn of day;
  And met the merry crew who danced about the May.
  Then late refresh'd with sleep, I rose to write
  The visionary vigils of the night.

RHYME a a b b 

    Blush, as thou may'st, my little book, with shame,
  Nor hope with homely verse to purchase fame;
  For such thy maker chose; and so design'd
  Thy simple style to suit thy lowly kind.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  In days of old, when Arthur fill'd the throne,
  Whose acts and fame to foreign lands were blown;
  The king of elves and little fairy queen
  Gamboll'd on heaths, and danced on every green;
  And where the jolly troop had led the round,
  The grass unbidden rose, and mark'd the ground:

RHYME a a a

  Nor darkling did they dance, the silver light
  Of Phoebe served to guide their steps aright,
  And with their tripping pleased, prolong the night.

RHYME a a a

  Her beams they follow'd, where at full she play'd,        
  Nor longer than she shed her horns they stay'd;
  From thence with airy flight to foreign lands convey'd

RHYME a a a

  Above the rest our Britain held they dear,
  More solemnly they kept their sabbaths here,
  And made more spacious rings, and revell'd half the year.

RHYME a a a

    I speak of ancient times, for now the swain
  Returning late may pass the woods in vain,
  And never hope to see the nightly train:

RHYME a a a

  In vain the dairy now with mints is dress'd,
  The dairymaid expects no fairy guest,                     
  To skim the bowls, and after pay the feast.

RHYME a a *

  She sighs and shakes her empty shoes in vain,
  No silver penny to reward her pain:
  For priests, with prayers, and other godly gear,
  Have made the merry goblins disappear;
  And where they play'd their merry pranks before,
  Have sprinkled holy water on the floor:

RHYME a a *

  And friars, that through the wealthy regions run,
  Thick as the motes that twinkle in the sun,
  Resort to farmers rich, and bless their halls,            
  And exorcise the beds, and cross the walls:
  This makes the fairy quires forsake the place,
  When once 'tis hallow'd with the rites of grace:

RHYME a a a

  But in the walks where wicked elves have been,
  The learning of the parish now is seen,
  The midnight parson, posting o'er the green,

RHYME a a a

  With gown tuck'd up, to wakes, for Sunday next,
  With humming ale encouraging his text;
  Nor wants the holy leer to country girl betwixt.

RHYME a a *

  From fiends and imps he sets the village free,            
  There haunts not any incubus but he.
  The maids and women need no danger fear
  To walk by night, and sanctity so near:
  For by some haycock, or some shady thorn,
  He bids his beads both even-song and morn.

RHYME a a a

    It so befell, in this King Arthur's reign,
  A lusty knight was pricking o'er the plain;
  A bachelor he was, and of the courtly train.

RHYME a a *

  It happen'd, as he rode, a damsel gay,
  In russet robes, to market took her way.                  
  Soon on the girl he cast an amorous eye,
  So straight she walk'd, and on her pasterns high:
  If, seeing her behind, he liked her pace,
  Now turning short, he better likes her face.
  He lights in haste, and, full of youthful fire,
  By force accomplish'd his obscene desire:
  This done, away he rode, not unespied,
  For swarming at his back the country cried:
  And once in view they never lost the sight,
  But seized, and pinion'd brought to court the knight,     

RHYME a a *

    Then courts of kings were held in high renown,
  Ere made the common brothels of the town:
  There, virgins honourable vows received,
  But chaste as maids in monasteries lived:
  The king himself, to nuptial ties a slave,
  No bad example to his poets gave:
  And they, not bad, but in a vicious age,
  Had not, to please the prince, debauch'd the stage.

RHYME a a *

    Now, what should Arthur do? He loved the knight,
  But sovereign monarchs are the source of right:           
  Moved by the damsel's tears and common cry,
  He doom'd the brutal ravisher to die.
  But fair Geneura rose in his defence,
  And pray'd so hard for mercy from the prince,
  That to his queen the king the offender gave,
  And left it in her power to kill or save:
  This gracious act the ladies all approve,
  Who thought it much a man should die for love;

RHYME a a a

  And with their mistress join'd in close debate,
  (Covering their kindness with dissembled hate)            
  If not to free him, to prolong his fate.

RHYME a a *

  At last agreed, they call him by consent
  Before the queen and female parliament;
  And the fair speaker, rising from the chair,
  Did thus the judgment of the house declare:

RHYME a a *

    Sir knight, though I have ask'd thy life, yet still
  Thy destiny depends upon my will:
  Nor hast thou other surety than the grace
  Not due to thee from our offended race.
  But as our kind is of a softer mould,                     
  And cannot blood without a sigh behold,
  I grant thee life; reserving still the power
  To take the forfeit when I see my hour:
  Unless thy answer to my next demand
  Shall set thee free from our avenging hand.

RHYME a a *

  The question, whose solution I require,
  Is, What the sex of women most desire?
  In this dispute thy judges are at strife;
  Beware; for on thy wit depends thy life.
  Yet (lest surprised, unknowing what to say,         
  Thou damn thyself) we give thee farther day:
  A year is thine to wander at thy will,
  And learn from others, if thou want'st the skill.
  But, not to hold our proffer turn'd to scorn,
  Good sureties will we have for thy return;
  That at the time prefix'd thou shalt obey,
  And at thy pledge's peril keep thy day.

RHYME a a *

    Woe was the knight at this severe command;
  But well he knew 'twas bootless to withstand:
  The terms accepted, as the fair ordain,             
  He put in bail for his return again,
  And promised answer at the day assign'd,
  The best, with Heaven's assistance, he could find.

RHYME a a a

    His leave thus taken, on his way he went
  With heavy heart, and full of discontent,
  Misdoubting much, and fearful of the event.

RHYME a a *

  'Twas hard the truth of such a point to find,
  As was not yet agreed among the kind.
  Thus on he went; still anxious more and more,
  Ask'd all he met, and knock'd at every door;        
  Inquired of men; but made his chief request,
  To learn from women what they loved the best.
  They answer'd each according to her mind,
  To please herself, not all the female kind.
  One was for wealth, another was for place;
  Crones, old and ugly, wish'd a better face:

RHYME a a *

  The widow's wish was oftentimes to wed;
  The wanton maids were all for sport a-bed.
  Some said the sex were pleased with handsome lies,
  And some gross flattery loved without disguise:     
  Truth is, says one, he seldom fails to win
  Who flatters well; for that's our darling sin:
  But long attendance, and a duteous mind,
  Will work even with the wisest of the kind.

RHYME a a *

  One thought the sex's prime felicity
  Was from the bonds of wedlock to be free;
  Their pleasures, hours, and actions all their own,
  And uncontroll'd to give account to none.
  Some wish a husband-fool; but such are cursed,
  For fools perverse of husbands are the worst:       
  All women would be counted chaste and wise,
  Nor should our spouses see, but with our eyes;
  For fools will prate; and though they want the wit
  To find close faults, yet open blots will hit;

RHYME a a *

  Though better for their ease to hold their tongue,
  For womankind was never in the wrong.
  So noise ensues, and quarrels last for life;
  The wife abhors the fool, the fool the wife.
  And some men say that great delight have we,
  To be for truth extoll'd, and secrecy;              
  And constant in one purpose still to dwell;
  And not our husbands' counsels to reveal.
  But that's a fable; for our sex is frail,
  Inventing rather than not tell a tale.
  Like leaky sieves, no secrets we can hold:
  Witness the famous tale that Ovid told.

RHYME a a *

    Midas the king, as in his book appears,
  By Phoebus was endow'd with ass's ears,
  Which under his long locks he well conceal'd,
  (As monarchs' vices must not be reveal'd)           
  For fear the people have them in the wind,
  Who long ago were neither dumb nor blind:
  Nor apt to think from Heaven their title springs,
  Since Jove and Mars left off begetting kings.
  This Midas knew; and durst communicate
  To none but to his wife his ears of state:
  One must be trusted, and he thought her fit,
  As passing prudent, and a parlous wit.
  To this sagacious confessor he went,
  And told her what a gift the gods had sent:         

RHYME a a *

  But told it under matrimonial seal,
  With strict injunction never to reveal.
  The secret heard, she plighted him her troth,
  (And sacred sure is every woman's oath)
  The royal malady should rest unknown,
  Both for her husband's honour and her own;
  But ne'ertheless she pined with discontent;
  The counsel rumbled till it found a vent.

RHYME a a a

  The thing she knew she was obliged to hide;
  By interest and by oath the wife was tied;          
  But if she told it not, the woman died.

RHYME a a a

  Loath to betray a husband and a prince,
  But she must burst, or blab; and no pretence
  Of honour tied her tongue from self-defence.

RHYME a a *

  A marshy ground commodiously was near,
  Thither she ran, and held her breath for fear;
  Lest if a word she spoke of any thing,
  That word might be the secret of the king.
  Thus full of counsel to the fen she went,
  Griped all the way, and longing for a vent;         

RHYME a a *

  Arrived, by pure necessity compell'd,
  On her majestic marrow-bones she kneel'd:
  Then to the water's brink she laid her head,
  And as a bittour[g i ] bumps within a reed,
  To thee alone, O lake, she said, I tell,
  (And, as thy queen, command thee to conceal!)
  Beneath his locks the king, my husband wears
  A goodly royal pair of ass's ears:
  Now I have eased my bosom of the pain,
  Till the next longing fit return again.             

RHYME a a *

    Thus through a woman was the secret known;
  Tell us, and in effect you tell the town.
  But to my tale; the knight with heavy cheer,
  Wandering in vain, had now consumed the year:
  One day was only left to solve the doubt,
  Yet knew no more than when he first set out.
  But home he must, and as the award had been,
  Yield up his body captive to the queen.
  In this despairing state he happ'd to ride,
  As fortune led him, by a forest side:               
  Lonely the vale, and full of horror stood,
  Brown with the shade of a religious wood!
  When full before him, at the noon of night,
  (The moon was up, and shot a gleamy light)

RHYME a a *

  He saw a quire of ladies in a round
  That featly footing seem'd to skim the ground:
  Thus dancing hand in hand, so light they were,
  He knew not where they trod, on earth or air.

RHYME a a a

  At speed he drove, and came a sudden guest,
  In hope where many women were, at least             
  Some one by chance might answer his request.

RHYME a a *

  But faster than his horse the ladies flew,
  And in a trice were vanish'd out of view.
    One only hag remain'd; but fouler far
  Than grandame apes in Indian forests are:

RHYME a a a

  Against a wither'd oak she lean'd her weight,
  Propp'd on her trusty staff, not half upright,
  And dropp'd an awkward courtesy to the knight;

RHYME a a *

  Then said, What makes you, sir, so late abroad
  Without a guide, and this no beaten road?           
  Or want you aught that here you hope to find,
  Or travel for some trouble in your mind?
  The last I guess; and if I read aright,
  Those of our sex are bound to serve a knight;
  Perhaps good counsel may your grief assuage,
  Then tell your pain; for wisdom is in age.

RHYME a a *

    To this the knight: Good mother, would you know
  The secret cause and spring of all my woe?
  My life must with to-morrow's light expire,
  Unless I tell what women most desire.               
  Now could you help me at this hard essay,
  Or for your inborn goodness, or for pay;
  Yours is my life, redeem'd by your advice,
  Ask what you please, and I will pay the price;
  The proudest kerchief of the court shall rest
  Well satisfied of what they love the best.
  Plight me thy faith, quoth she, that what I ask,
  Thy danger over, and perform'd thy task,
  That thou shalt give for hire of thy demand;
  Here take thy oath, and seal it on my hand;         
  I warrant thee, on peril of my life,
  Thy words shall please both widow, maid, and wife.

RHYME a a *

    More words there needed not to move the knight
  To take her offer, and his truth to plight.
  With that she spread a mantle on the ground,
  And, first inquiring whither he was bound,
  Bade him not fear, though long and rough the way,
  At court he should arrive ere break of day;

RHYME a a a

  His horse should find the way without a guide.
  She said: with fury they began to ride,             
  He on the midst, the beldam at his side.

RHYME a a *

  The horse what devil drove I cannot tell,
  But only this, they sped their journey well:
  And all the way the crone inform'd the knight,
  How he should answer the demand aright.

RHYME a a *

    To court they came; the news was quickly spread
  Of his returning to redeem his head.
  The female senate was assembled soon,
  With all the mob of women in the town:
  The queen sat lord chief-justice of the hall,       
  And bade the crier cite the criminal.
  The knight appear'd; and silence they proclaim;
  Then first the culprit answer'd to his name:
  And, after forms of law, was last required
  To name the thing that women most desired.

RHYME a a *

    The offender, taught his lesson by the way,
  And by his counsel order'd what to say,
  Thus bold began: My lady liege, said he,
  What all your sex desire is Sovereignty.
  The wife affects her husband to command;            
  All must be hers, both money, house, and land.
  The maids are mistresses even in their name;
  And of their servants full dominion claim.

RHYME a a a

  This, at the peril of my head, I say,
  A blunt plain truth, the sex aspires to sway,
  You to rule all, while we, like slaves, obey.

RHYME a a *

  There was not one, or widow, maid, or wife,
  But said the knight had well deserved his life.
  Even fair Geneura, with a blush, confess'd
  The man had found what women love the best.

RHYME a a *

    Upstarts the beldam, who was there unseen,        
  And, reverence made, accosted thus the queen:
  My liege, said she, before the court arise,
  May I, poor wretch, find favour in your eyes,
  To grant my just request? 'twas I who taught
  The knight this answer, and inspired his thought;
  None but a woman could a man direct
  To tell us women what we most affect.
  But first I swore him on his knightly troth,
  (And here demand performance of his oath)           

RHYME a a *

  To grant the boon that next I should desire;
  He gave his faith, and I expect my hire:
  My promise is fulfill'd; I saved his life,
  And claim his debt, to take me for his wife.
  The knight was ask'd, nor could his oath deny,
  But hoped they would not force him to comply.
  The women, who would rather wrest the laws,
  Than let a sister-plaintiff lose the cause,
  (As judges on the bench more gracious are,
  And more attent to brothers of the bar)             
  Cried one and all, the suppliant should have right,
  And to the grandame hag adjudged the knight.

RHYME a a *

    In vain he sigh'd, and oft with tears desired
  Some reasonable suit might be required.
  But still the crone was constant to her note;
  The more he spoke, the more she stretch'd her throat.
  In vain he proffer'd all his goods, to save
  His body destined to that living grave.
  The liquorish hag rejects the pelf with scorn;
  And nothing but the man would serve her turn.       
  Not all the wealth of eastern kings, said she,
  Have power to part my plighted love, and me;
  And, old and ugly as I am, and poor,
  Yet never will I break the faith I swore;
  For mine thou art by promise, during life,
  And I thy loving and obedient wife.

RHYME a a *

    My love! nay, rather, my damnation thou,
  Said he: nor am I bound to keep my vow:
  The fiend thy sire hath sent thee from below,
  Else how couldst thou my secret sorrows know?       

RHYME a a a

  Avaunt, old witch! for I renounce thy bed:
  The queen may take the forfeit of my head,
  Ere any of my race so foul a crone shall wed.

RHYME a a *

  Both heard, the judge pronounced against the knight;
  So was he married in his own despite;

RHYME a a *

  And all day after hid him as an owl,
  Not able to sustain a sight so foul.
  Perhaps the reader thinks I do him wrong,
  To pass the marriage feast, and nuptial song:
  Mirth there was none, the man was _a-la-mort_,      
  And little courage had to make his court.
  To bed they went, the bridegroom and the bride:
  Was never such an ill-pair'd couple tied,

RHYME a a *

  Restless, he toss'd and tumbled to and fro,
  And roll'd, and wriggled further off, for woe.
  The good old wife lay smiling by his side,
  And caught him in her quivering arms, and cried,

RHYME a a a

  When you my ravish'd predecessor saw,
  You were not then become this man of straw;
  Had you been such, you might have 'scaped the law.  

RHYME a a *

  Is this the custom of King Arthur's court?
  Are all round-table knights of such a sort?
  Remember, I am she who saved your life,
  Your loving, lawful, and complying wife:
  Not thus you swore in your unhappy hour,
  Nor I for this return employ'd my power.
  In time of need I was your faithful friend;
  Nor did I since, nor ever will offend.
  Believe me, my loved lord, 'tis much unkind;
  What fury has possess'd your alter'd mind?          

RHYME a a *

  Thus on my wedding night--without pretence--
  Come turn this way, or tell me my offence.
  If not your wife, let reason's rule persuade;
  Name but my fault, amends shall soon be made.
  Amends! nay, that's impossible, said he,
  What change of age or ugliness can be?

RHYME a a a

  Or could Medea's magic mend thy face,
  Thou art descended from so mean a race,
  That never knight was match'd with such disgrace.

RHYME a a *

  What wonder, madam, if I move my side,              
  When, if I turn, I turn to such a bride?
  And is this all that troubles you so sore?
  And what the devil couldst thou wish me more?
  Ah, Benedicite, replied the crone;
  Then cause of just complaining have you none.
  The remedy to this were soon applied,
  Would you be like the bridegroom to the bride:
  But, for you say a long descended race,
  And wealth and dignity, and power and place,

RHYME a a *

  Make gentlemen, and that your high degree           
  Is much disparaged to be match'd with me;
  Know this, my lord, nobility of blood
  Is but a glittering and fallacious good:
  The nobleman is he, whose noble mind
  Is fill'd with inborn worth, unborrow'd from his kind.
  The King of Heaven was in a manger laid,
  And took his earth but from an humble maid;
  Then what can birth, or mortal men, bestow?
  Since floods no higher than their fountains flow.
  We, who for name and empty honour strive,           
  Our true nobility from him derive.
  Your ancestors, who puff your mind with pride,
  And vast estates to mighty titles tied,
  Did not your honour, but their own, advance;
  For virtue comes not by inheritance.

RHYME a a *

  If you tralineate from your father's mind,
  What are you else but of a bastard kind?
  Do, as your great progenitors have done,
  And, by their virtues, prove yourself their son.
  No father can infuse or wit or grace;               
  A mother comes across, and mars the race.
  A grandsire or a grandame taints the blood;
  And seldom three descents continue good.
  Were virtue by descent, a noble name
  Could never villanise his father's fame;
  But, as the first, the last of all the line,
  Would, like the sun, even in descending shine;
  Take fire, and bear it to the darkest house,
  Betwixt King Arthur's court and Caucasus:

RHYME a a *

  If you depart, the flame shall still remain,        
  And the bright blaze enlighten all the plain:
  Nor, till the fuel perish, can decay,
  By nature form'd on things combustible to prey.
  Such is not man, who, mixing better seed
  With worse, begets a base degenerate breed:
  The bad corrupts the good, and leaves behind
  No trace of all the great begetter's mind.
  The father sinks within his son, we see,
  And often rises in the third degree;
  If better luck a better mother give,                
  Chance gave us being, and by chance we live.

RHYME a a a

  Such as our atoms were, even such are we,
  Or call it chance, or strong necessity:
  Thus loaded with dead weight, the will is free.

RHYME a a *

  And thus it needs must be; for seed conjoin'd
  Lets into nature's work the imperfect kind;
  But fire, the enlivener of the general frame,
  Is one, its operation still the same.

RHYME a a *

  Its principle is in itself: while ours
  Works, as confederates war, with mingled powers;    
  Or man or woman, which soever fails:
  And oft the vigour of the worse prevails.
  Aether with sulphur blended alters hue,
  And casts a dusky gleam of Sodom blue.
  Thus, in a brute, their ancient honour ends,
  And the fair mermaid in a fish descends:
  The line is gone; no longer duke or earl;
  But, by himself degraded, turns a churl.

RHYME a a a

  Nobility of blood is but renown
  Of thy great fathers by their virtue known,         
  And a long trail of light, to thee descending down.

RHYME a a *

  If in thy smoke it ends, their glories shine;
  But infamy and villanage are thine.
  Then what I said before is plainly show'd,
  The true nobility proceeds from God;
  Nor left us by inheritance, but given
  By bounty of our stars, and grace of Heaven.
  Thus from a captive Servius Tullius rose,
  Whom for his virtues the first Romans chose:

RHYME a a *

  Fabricius from their walls repell'd the foe,        
  Whose noble hands had exercised the plough.
  From hence, my lord, and love, I thus conclude,
  That though my homely ancestors were rude,
  Mean as I am, yet I may have the grace
  To make you father of a generous race:
  And noble then am I, when I begin,
  In virtue clothed, to cast the rags of sin.
  If poverty be my upbraided crime,
  And you believe in Heaven, there was a time

RHYME a a *

  When He, the great controller of our fate,          
  Deign'd to be man, and lived in low estate;
  Which He who had the world at his dispose,
  If poverty were vice, would never choose.
  Philosophers have said, and poets sing,
  That a glad poverty's an honest thing.
  Content is wealth, the riches of the mind;
  And happy he who can that treasure find.

RHYME a a a

  But the base miser starves amidst his store,
  Broods on his gold, and, griping still at more,
  Sits sadly pining, and believes he's poor.          

RHYME a a *

  The ragged beggar, though he want relief,
  Has not to lose, and sings before the thief.
  Want is a bitter and a hateful good,
  Because its virtues are not understood;
  Yet many things, impossible to thought,
  Have been by need to full perfection brought:
  The daring of the soul proceeds from thence,
  Sharpness of wit, and active diligence:
  Prudence at once, and fortitude, it gives,
  And, if in patience taken, mends our lives;         
  For even that indigence, that brings me low,
  Makes me myself, and Him above, to know.

RHYME a a *

  A good which none would challenge, few would choose,
  A fair possession, which mankind refuse.
  If we from wealth to poverty descend,
  Want gives to know the flatterer from the friend.
  If I am old and ugly, well for you,
  No lewd adulterer will my love pursue;

RHYME a a *

  Nor jealousy, the bane of married life,
  Shall haunt you for a wither'd homely wife;         
  For age and ugliness, as all agree,
  Are the best guards of female chastity.
  Yet since I see your mind is worldly bent,
  I'll do my best to further your content.
  And therefore of two gifts in my dispose,
  Think ere you speak, I grant you leave to choose:
  Would you I should be still deform'd and old,
  Nauseous to touch, and loathsome to behold;

RHYME a a *

  On this condition to remain for life,
  A careful, tender, and obedient wife,               
  In all I can contribute to your ease,
  And not in deed, or word, or thought displease:
  Or would you rather have me young and fair,
  And take the chance that happens to your share?
  Temptations are in beauty, and in youth,
  And how can you depend upon my truth?
  Now weigh the danger with the doubtful bliss,
  And thank yourself, if aught should fall amiss.

RHYME a a *

    Sore sigh'd the knight, who this long sermon heard;
  At length, considering all, his heart he cheer'd,   
  And thus replied: My lady, and my wife,
  To your wise conduct I resign my life:
  Choose you for me, for well you understand
  The future good and ill, on either hand:
  But if an humble husband may request,
  Provide, and order all things for the best;
  Yours be the care to profit, and to please;
  And let your subject servant take his ease.

RHYME a a *

    Then thus in peace, quoth she, concludes the strife,
  Since I am turn'd the husband, you the wife:        
  The matrimonial victory is mine,
  Which, having fairly gain'd, I will resign:
  Forgive if I have said or done amiss,
  And seal the bargain with a friendly kiss.
  I promised you but one content to share,
  But now I will become both good and fair:
  No nuptial quarrel shall disturb your ease;
  The business of my life shall be to please:
  And for my beauty, that, as time shall try--
  But draw the curtain first, and cast your eye.      

RHYME a a *

    He look'd, and saw a creature heavenly fair,
  In bloom of youth, and of a charming air.
  With joy he turn'd, and seized her ivory arm;
  And like Pygmalion found the statue warm.
  Small arguments there needed to prevail;
  A storm of kisses pour'd as thick as hail.
  Thus long in mutual bliss they lay embraced,
  And their first love continued to the last:
  One sunshine was their life, no cloud between;
  Nor ever was a kinder couple seen.                  

RHYME a a *

    And so may all our lives like theirs be led;
  Heaven send the maids young husbands fresh in bed!
  May widows wed as often as they can,
  And ever for the better change their man!
  And some devouring plague pursue their lives,
  Who will not well be govern'd by their wives!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  A parish priest was of the pilgrim train;
  An awful, reverend, and religious man.
  His eyes diffused a venerable grace,
  And charity itself was in his face.

RHYME a a a

  Rich was his soul, though his attire was poor;
  (As God had clothed his own ambassador;)
  For such, on earth, his bless'd Redeemer bore.

RHYME a a *

  Of sixty years he seem'd; and well might last
  To sixty more, but that he lived too fast;

RHYME a a *

  Refined himself to soul, to curb the sense;               
  And made almost a sin of abstinence,
  Yet, had his aspect nothing of severe,
  But such a face as promised him sincere.

RHYME a a a

  Nothing reserved or sullen was to see;
  But sweet regards, and pleasing sanctity:
  Mild was his accent, and his action free.

RHYME a a *

  With eloquence innate his tongue was arm'd;
  Though harsh the precept, yet the preacher charm'd.
  For letting down the golden chain from high,
  He drew his audience upward to the sky;                   

RHYME a a *

  And oft, with holy hymns, he charm'd their ears:
  (A music more melodious than the spheres.)
  For David left him, when he went to rest,
  His lyre; and after him he sung the best.
  He bore his great commission in his look:
  But sweetly temper'd awe; and soften'd all he spoke.

RHYME a a a

  He preach'd the joys of heaven, and pains of hell;
  And warn'd the sinner with becoming zeal;
  But on eternal mercy loved to dwell.

RHYME a a *

  He taught the gospel rather than the law,                 
  And forced himself to drive: but loved to draw.

RHYME a a *

  For fear but freezes minds; but love, like heat,
  Exhales the soul sublime, to seek her native seat.
  To threats the stubborn sinner oft is hard,
  Wrapp'd in his crimes, against the storm prepared;
  But, when the milder beams of mercy play,
  He melts, and throws his cumbrous cloak away,
  Lightning and thunder (heaven's artillery)
  As harbingers before the Almighty fly:
  Those but proclaim his style, and disappear;              
  The stiller sound succeeds, and God is there.

RHYME a a *

    The tithes, his parish freely paid, he took;
  But never sued, or cursed with bell and book.
  With patience bearing wrong; but offering none:
  Since every man is free to lose his own.
  The country churls, according to their kind,
  (Who grudge their dues, and love to be behind),
  The less he sought his offerings, pinch'd the more,
  And praised a priest contented to be poor.

RHYME a a *

    Yet of his little he had some to spare,                 
  To feed the famish'd, and to clothe the bare;
  For mortified he was to that degree,
  A poorer than himself he would not see.
  True priests, he said, and preachers of the Word,
  Were only stewards of their sovereign Lord:
  Nothing was theirs; but all the public store;
  Intrusted riches, to relieve the poor:
  Who, should they steal for want of his relief,
  He judged himself accomplice with the thief.

RHYME a a *

    Wide was his parish; not contracted close               
  In streets, but here and there a straggling house;
  Yet still he was at hand, without request,
  To serve the sick; to succour the distress'd:
  Tempting, on foot, alone, without affright,
  The dangers of a dark tempestuous night.

RHYME a a *

    All this the good old man perform'd alone,
  Nor spared his pains; for curate he had none:
  Nor durst he trust another with his care;
  Nor rode himself to Paul's, the public fair,
  To chaffer for preferment with his gold,                  
  Where bishoprics and sinecures are sold:

RHYME a a a

  But duly watch'd his flock, by night and day,
  And from the prowling wolf redeem'd the prey;
  And hungry sent the wily fox away.

RHYME a a *

    The proud he tamed, the penitent he cheer'd;
  Nor to rebuke the rich offender fear'd.
  His preaching much, but more his practice wrought;
  (A living sermon of the truths he taught);
  For this by rules severe his life he squared,
  That all might see the doctrine which they heard.         
  For priests, he said, are patterns for the rest:
  (The gold of heaven, who bear the God impress'd):
  But when the precious coin is kept unclean,
  The Sovereign's image is no longer seen.
  If they be foul on whom the people trust,
  Well may the baser brass contract a rust.

RHYME a a *

    The prelate for his holy life he prized;
  The worldly pomp of prelacy despised:
  His Saviour came not with a gaudy show;
  Nor was his kingdom of the world below.                   

RHYME a a a

  Patience in want, and poverty of mind,
  These marks of Church and Churchmen he design'd,
  And living taught, and dying left behind.

RHYME a a *

  The crown he wore was of the pointed thorn:
  In purple he was crucified, not born.
  They who contend for place and high degree,
  Are not his sons, but those of Zebedee.

RHYME a a *

    Not but he knew the signs of earthly power
  Might well become Saint Peter's successor;
  The holy father holds a double reign,               
  The prince may keep his pomp, the fisher must be plain.

RHYME a a *

    Such was the saint, who shone with every grace,
  Reflecting, Moses'-like, his Maker's face.
  God saw his image lively was express'd;
  And his own work, as in creation, bless'd.

RHYME a a *

    The Tempter saw him too, with envious eye;
  And, as on Job, demanded leave to try.
  He took the time when Richard was deposed,
  And high and low with happy Harry closed.
  This prince, though great in arms, the priest withstood:
  Near though he was, yet not the next of blood.

RHYME a a a

  Had Richard, unconstrain'd, resign'd the throne,
  A king can give no more than is his own:
  The title stood entail'd, had Richard had a son.

RHYME a a *

    Conquest, an odious name, was laid aside,
  Where all submitted, none the battle tried.
  The senseless plea of right by Providence
  Was, by a flattering priest, invented since;
  And lasts no longer than the present sway;
  But justifies the next who comes in play.           

RHYME a a *

    The people's right remains; let those who dare
  Dispute their power, when they the judges are.

RHYME a a *

    He join'd not in their choice, because he knew
  Worse might, and often did, from change ensue.
  Much to himself he thought; but little spoke;
  And, undeprived, his benefice forsook.

RHYME a a *

    Now, through the land, his cure of souls he stretch'd;
  And like a primitive apostle preach'd:
  Still cheerful; ever constant to his call;
  By many follow'd; loved by most, admired by all.    
  With what he begg'd, his brethren he relieved:
  And gave the charities himself received.
  Gave, while he taught; and edified the more,
  Because he showed, by proof, 'twas easy to be poor.

RHYME a a *

    He went not with the crowd to see a shrine;
  But fed us, by the way, with food divine.

RHYME a a *

    In deference to his virtues, I forbear
  To show you what the rest in orders were:
  This brilliant is so spotless and so bright,
  He needs no foil, but shines by his own proper light.   


RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Eternal Twins! that conquer death and time,
      Perpetual advocates in heaven and earth!
      Fair, chaste, immaculate, and all divine,
      Glorious alone, before the first man's birth;
    Your twofold charities, celestial lights,
      Bow your sun-rising eyes, planets of joy,
      Upon these orphan poems; in whose rights
      Conceit first claimed his birthright to enjoy.
    If, pitiful, you shun the song of death,
      Or fear the stain of love's life-dropping blood,
      O know then, you are pure; and purer faith
      Shall still keep white the flower, the fruit, and bud.
    Love moveth all things. You that love, shall move
    All things in him, and he in you shall love.

TITLE TO HIS MISTRESS

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Grace full of grace, though in these verses here
      My love complains of others than of thee,
      Yet thee alone I loved, and they by me,
    Thou yet unknown, only mistaken were.
    Like him which feels a heat now here now there,
      Blames now this cause now that, until he see
      The fire indeed from whence they caused be;
    Which fire I now do know is you, my dear,
    Thus diverse loves dispersed in my verse
      In thee alone for ever I unite,
    And fully unto thee more to rehearse;
      To him I fly for grace that rules above,
    That by my grace I may live in delight,
      Or by his grace I never more may love.

TITLE TO HIS ABSENT DIANA

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e f f

    Severed from sweet content, my live's sole light,
      Banished by over-weening wit from my desire,
      This poor acceptance only I require:
    That though my fault have forced me from thy sight
    Yet that thou would'st, my sorrows to requite,
      Review these sonnets, pictures of thy praise;
      Wherein each woe thy wondrous worth doth raise,
    Though first thy worth bereft me of delight.
      See them forsaken; for I them forsook,
    Forsaken first of thee, next of my sense;
      And when thou deign'st on their black tears to look,
    Shed not one tear, my tears to recompence;
      But joy in this, though fate 'gainst me repine,
      My verse still lives to witness thee divine.

TITLE The First Decade

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Resolved to love, unworthy to obtain,
      I do no favour crave; but, humble wise,
      To thee my sighs in verse I sacrifice,
    Only some pity and no help to gain.
    Hear then, and as my heart shall aye remain
      A patient object to thy lightning eyes,
      A patient ear bring thou to thund'ring cries;
    Fear not the crack, when I the blow sustain.
      So as thine eye bred mine ambitious thought,
    So shall thine ear make proud my voice for joy.
      Lo, dear, what wonders great by thee are wrought,
    When I but little favour do enjoy!
      The voice is made the ear for to rejoice,
      And your ear giveth pleasure to my voice.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Blame not my heart for flying up so high,
      Sith thou art cause that it this flight begun;
      For earthly vapours drawn up by the sun,
    Comets become, and night suns in the sky.
    Mine humble heart, so with thy heavenly eye
      Drawn up aloft, all low desires doth shun;
      Raise thou me up, as thou my heart hast done,
    So during night in heaven remain may I.
      I say again, blame not my high desire,
    Sith of us both the cause thereof depends.
      In thee doth shine, in me doth burn a fire,
    Fire draws up other, and itself ascends.
      Thine eye a fire, and so draws up my love;
      My love a fire, and so ascends above.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Fly low, dear love, thy sun dost thou not see?
      Take heed, do not so near his rays aspire;
      Lest, for thy pride, inflamed with wreakful ire,
    It burn thy wings, as it hath burned me.
    Thou haply sayst thy wings immortal be,
      And so cannot consumed be with fire;
      And one is hope, the other is desire,
    And that the heavens bestowed them both on thee.
      A muse's words made thee with hope to fly,
    An angel's face desire hath begot,
      Thyself engendered by a goddess' eye;
    Yet for all this, immortal thou art not.
      Of heavenly eye though thou begotten art,
      Yet art thou born but of a mortal heart.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    A friend of mine, pitying my hopeless love,
      Hoping by killing hope my love to stay,
      "Let not," quoth he, "thy hope, thy heart betray;
    Impossible it is her heart to move."
    But sith resolved love cannot remove
      As long as thy divine perfections stay,
      Thy godhead then he sought to take away.
    Dear, seek revenge and him a liar prove;
      Gods only do impossibilities.
    "Impossible," saith he, "thy grace to gain."
      Show then the power of divinities
    By granting me thy favour to obtain.
      So shall thy foe give to himself the lie;
      A goddess thou shall prove, and happy I!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Thine eye the glass where I behold my heart,
      Mine eye the window through the which thine eye
      May see my heart, and there thyself espy
    In bloody colours how thou painted art.
    Thine eye the pile is of a murdering dart;
      Mine eye the sight thou tak'st thy level by
      To hit my heart, and never shoot'st awry.
    Mine eye thus helps thine eye to work my smart.
      Thine eye a fire is both in heat and light;
    Mine eye of tears a river doth become.
      O that the water of mine eye had might
    To quench the flames that from thine eye doth come,
      Or that the fires kindled by thine eye,
      The flowing streams of mine eyes could make dry.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Mine eye with all the deadly sins is fraught.
      First _proud_, sith it presumed to look so high.
      A watchman being made, stood gazing by,
    And _idle_, took no heed till I was caught.
    And _envious_, bears envy that by thought
      Should in his absence be to her so nigh.
      To kill my heart, mine eye let in her eye;
    And so consent gave to a _murder_ wrought.
      And _covetous_, it never would remove
    From her fair hair, gold so doth please his sight.
      _Unchaste_, a baud between my heart and love.
    A _glutton_ eye, with tears drunk every night.
      These sins procured have a goddess' ire,
      Wherefore my heart is damned in love's sweet fire.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Falsely doth envy of your praises blame
      My tongue, my pen, my heart of flattery,
      Because I said there was no sun but thee.
    It called my tongue the partial trump of fame,
    And saith my pen hath flattered thy name,
      Because my pen did to my tongue agree;
      And that my heart must needs a flatterer be,
    Which taught both tongue and pen to say the same.
      No, no, I flatter not when thee I call
    The sun, sith that the sun was never such;
      But when the sun thee I compared withal,
    Doubtless the sun I flattered too much.
      Witness mine eyes, I say the truth in this,
      They have seen thee and know that so it is.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Much sorrow in itself my love doth move,
      More my despair to love a hopeless bliss,
      My folly most to love whom sure to miss
    O help me, but this last grief to remove;
    All pains, if you command, it joy shall prove,
      And wisdom to seek joy. Then say but this,
      "Because my pleasure in thy torment is,
    I do command thee without hope to love!"
      So when this thought my sorrow shall augment
    That my own folly did procure my pain,
      Then shall I say to give myself content,
    "Obedience only made me love in vain.
      It was your will, and not my want of wit;
      I have the pain, bear you the blame of it!"

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    My lady's presence makes the roses red,
      Because to see her lips they blush with shame.
      The lily's leaves for envy pale became,
    And her white hands in them this envy bred.
    The marigold the leaves abroad doth spread,
      Because the sun's and her power is the same.
      The violet of purple colour came,
    Dyed in the blood she made my heart to shed.
      In brief, all flowers from her their virtue take;
    From her sweet breath their sweet smells do proceed;
      The living heat which her eyebeams doth make
    Warmeth the ground and quickeneth the seed.
      The rain wherewith she watereth the flowers,
      Falls from mine eyes which she dissolves in showers.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Heralds at arms do three perfections quote,
      To wit, most fair, most rich, most glittering;
      So when those three concur within one thing,
    Needs must that thing of honour be a note.
    Lately I did behold a rich fair coat,
      Which wished fortune to mine eyes did bring.
      A lordly coat, yet worthy of a king,
    In which one might all these perfections note.
      A field of lilies, roses proper bare;
    Two stars in chief; the crest was waves of gold.
      How glittering 'twas, might by the stars appear;
    The lilies made it fair for to behold.
      And rich it was as by the gold appeareth;
      But happy he that in his arms it weareth!

TITLE The Second Decade

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    If true love might true love's reward obtain,
      Dumb wonder only might speak of my joy;
      But too much worth hath made thee too much coy,
    And told me long ago I sighed in vain.
    Not then vain hope of undeserved gain
      Hath made me paint in verses mine annoy,
      But for thy pleasure, that thou might'st enjoy
    Thy beauty's praise, in glasses of my pain.
      See then, thyself, though me thou wilt not hear,
    By looking on my verse. For pain in verse,
      Love doth in pain, beauty in love appear.
        So if thou would'st my verses' meaning see,
    Expound them thus, when I my love rehearse:
      "None loves like he!" that is, "None fair like me!"

RHYME a b b a a b b a c c d e d e

    It may be, love my death doth not pretend,
      Although he shoots at me, but thinks it fit
      Thus to bewitch thee for thy benefit,
    Causing thy will to my wish to condescend.
    For witches which some murder do intend,
      Do make a picture and do shoot at it;
      And in that part where they the picture hit,
    The party's self doth languish to his end.
      So love, too weak by force thy heart to taint,
      Within my heart thy heavenly shape doth paint;
    Suffering therein his arrows to abide,
      Only to th'end he might by witches' art,
    Within my heart pierce through thy picture's side,
      And through thy picture's side might wound my heart.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    The sun, his journey ending in the west,
      Taketh his lodging up in Thetis' bed;
      Though from our eyes his beams be banished,
    Yet with his light th' antipodes be blest.
    Now when the sun-time brings my sun to rest,
      Which me too oft of rest hath hindered,
      And whiter skin with white sheet covered,
    And softer cheek doth on soft pillow rest,
      Then I, O sun of suns! and light of lights!
    Wish me with those antipodes to be,
      Which see and feel thy beams and heat by nights.
        Well, though the night both cold and darksome is,
    Yet half the day's delight the night grants me,
        I feel my sun's heat, though his light I miss.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Lady, in beauty and in favour rare,
      Of favour, not of due, I favour crave.
      Nature to thee beauty and favour gave;
    Fair then thou art, and favour thou may'st spare.
    Nor when on me bestowed your favours are,
      Less favour in your face you shall not have;
      If favour then a wounded soul may save,
    Of murder's guilt, dear Lady, then beware.
      My loss of life a million fold were less
    Than the least loss should unto you befall;
      Yet grant this gift; which gift when I possess,
      Both I have life and you no loss at all.
        For by your favour only I do live,
        And favour you may well both keep and give.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    My reason absent did mine eyes require
      To watch and ward and such foes to descry
      As they should ne'er my heart approaching spy;
    But traitor eyes my heart's death did conspire,
    Corrupted with hope's gifts; let in desire
      To burn my heart; and sought no remedy,
      Though store of water were in either eye,
    Which well employed, might well have quenched the fire.
      Reason returned; love and fortune made
    Judges, to judge mine eyes to punishment.
      Fortune, sith they by sight my heart betrayed
    From wished sight, adjudged them banishment;
      Love, sith by fire murdered my heart was found,
      Adjudged them in tears for to be drowned.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Wonder it is and pity is't that she
      In whom all beauty's treasure we may find,
      That may unrich the body and the mind,
    Towards the poor should use no charity.
    My love has gone a begging unto thee.
      And if that beauty had not been more kind
      That pity, long ere this he had been pined;
      But beauty is content his food to be.
      O pity have when such poor orphans beg!
    Love, naked boy, hath nothing on his back;
      And though he wanteth neither arm nor leg,
    Yet maimed he is sith he his sight doth lack.
      And yet though blind he beauty can behold,
      And yet though naked he feels more heat than cold.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Pity refusing my poor love to feed,
      A beggar starved for want of help he lies;
      And at your mouth, the door of beauty, cries,
    That thence some alms of sweet grants might proceed.
    But as he waiteth for some almes deed,
      A cherry tree before the door he spies.
      "O dear," quoth he, "two cherries may suffice.
    Two only may save life in this my need."
      But beggars, can they nought but cherries eat?
    Pardon my love, he is a goddess' son,
      And never feedeth but on dainty meat,
    Else need he not to pine, as he hath done;
      For only the sweet fruit of this sweet tree
      Can give food to my love and life to me.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    The fowler hides as closely as he may
      The net, where caught the silly bird should be,
      Lest he the threatening poison should but see,
    And so for fear be forced to fly away.
    My lady so, the while she doth assay
      In curled knots fast to entangle me,
      Put on her veil, to th' end I should not flee
    The golden net wherein I am a prey.
      Alas, most sweet! what need is of a net
    To catch a bird that is already ta'en?
      Sith with your hand alone you may it get,
    For it desires to fly into the same.
        What needs such art my thoughts then to entrap,
        When of themselves they fly into your lap?

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Sweet hand, the sweet but cruel bow thou art,
      From whence at me five ivory arrows fly;
      So with five wounds at once I wounded lie,
    Bearing my breast the print of every dart.
    Saint Francis had the like, yet felt no smart,
      Where I in living torments never die.
      His wounds were in his hands and feet; where I
    All these five helpless wounds feel in my heart.
      Now, as Saint Francis, if a saint am I,
    The bow that shot these shafts a relic is;
      I mean the hand, which is the reason why
    So many for devotion thee would kiss:
        And some thy glove kiss as a thing divine,
        This arrows' quiver, and this relic's shrine.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c c d e d e

    Fair sun, if you would have me praise your light,
      When night approacheth wherefore do you fly?
      Time is so short, beauties so many be,
    As I have need to see them day and night,
    That by continual view my verses might
      Tell all the beams of your divinity;
      Which praise to you and joy should be to me,
    You living by my verse, I by your sight;
      I by your sight, and not you by my verse,
      Need mortal skill immortal praise rehearse?
    No, no, though eyes were blind, and verse were dumb,
      Your beauty should be seen and your fame known;
    For by the wind which from my sighs do come,
        Your praises round about the world are blown.

TITLE The Third Decade

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Uncivil sickness, hast thou no regard,
      But dost presume my dearest to molest,
      And without leave dar'st enter in that breast
    Whereto sweet love approach yet never dared?
    Spare thou her health, which my life hath not spared;
      Too bitter such revenge of my unrest!
      Although with wrongs my thought she hath opprest,
    My wrongs seek not revenge, they crave reward
      Cease, sickness, cease in her then to remain;
    And come and welcome, harbour thou in me
      Whom love long since hath taught to suffer in!
        So she which hath so oft my pain increased,
    O God, that I might so revenged be,
        By my poor pain might have her pain released!

RHYME a b a b b c b c c d c d e e

    Woe to mine eyes, the organs of mine ill;
      Hate to my heart, for not concealing joy;
      A double curse upon my tongue be still,
      Whose babbling lost what else I might enjoy!
    When first mine eyes did with thy beauty joy,
      They to my heart thy wondrous virtues told;
      Who, fearing lest thy beams should him destroy,
      Whate'er he knew, did to my tongue unfold.
    My tell-tale tongue, in talking over bold,
      What they in private council did declare,
      To thee, in plain and public terms unrolled;
      And so by that made thee more coyer far.
    What in thy praise he spoke, that didst thou trust;
    And yet my sorrows thou dost hold unjust.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Of an Athenian young man have I read,
      Who on blind fortune's picture doated so,
      That when he could not buy it to his bed,
      On it he gazing died for very woe.
    My fortune's picture art thou, flinty dame,
      That settest golden apples to my sight;
      But wilt by no means let me taste the same.
      To drown in sight of land is double spite.
    Of fortune as thou learn'dst to be unkind,
      So learn to be unconstant to disdain.
      The wittiest women are to sport inclined.
      Honour is pride, and pride is nought but pain.
    Let others boast of choosing for the best;
    'Tis substances not names must make us blest.

TITLE The Fourth Decade

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Needs must I leave and yet needs must I love;
      In vain my wit doth tell in verse my woe;
      Despair in me, disdain in thee, doth show
    How by my wit I do my folly prove.
    All this my heart from love can never move.
      Love is not in my heart. No, Lady, no,
      My heart is love itself. Till I forego
    My heart I never can my love remove.
      How can I then leave love? I do intend
      Not to crave grace, but yet to wish it still;
      Not to praise thee, but beauty to commend;
    And so, by beauty's praise, praise thee I will;
        For as my heart is love, love not in me,
        So beauty thou, beauty is not in thee.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Sweet sovereign, since so many minds remain
      Obedient subjects at thy beauty's call,
      So many hearts bound in thy hairs as thrall,
    So many eyes die with one look's disdain,
    Go, seek the honour that doth thee pertain,
      That the Fifth Monarchy may thee befall!
      Thou hast such means to conquer men withal,
    As all the world must yield or else be slain.
      To fight, thou need'st no weapons but thine eyes,
    Thine hair hath gold enough to pay thy men,
      And for their food thy beauty will suffice;
        For men and armour, Lady, care have none;
    For one will sooner yield unto thee then
        When he shall meet thee naked all alone.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    When your perfections to my thoughts appear,
      They say among themselves, "O happy we,
      Whichever shall so rare an object see!"
    But happy heart, if thoughts less happy were!
    For their delights have cost my heart full dear,
      In whom of love a thousand causes be,
      And each cause breeds a thousand loves in me,
    And each love more than thousand hearts can bear.
      How can my heart so many loves then hold,
    Which yet by heaps increase from day to day?
      But like a ship that's o'ercharged with gold,
    Must either sink or hurl the gold away.
        But hurl not love; thou canst not, feeble heart;
        In thine own blood, thou therefore drowned art!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Fools be they that inveigh 'gainst Mahomet,
      Who's but a moral of love's monarchy.
      But a dull adamant, as straw by jet,
      He in an iron chest was drawn on high.
    In midst of Mecca's temple roof, some say,
      He now hangs without touch or stay at all.
      That Mahomet is she to whom I pray;
      May ne'er man pray so ineffectual!
    Mine eyes, love's strange exhaling adamants,
      Un'wares, to my heart's temple's height have wrought
      The iron idol that compassion wants,
      Who my oft tears and travails sets at nought.
    Iron hath been transformed to gold by art;
    Her face, limbs, flesh and all, gold; save her heart.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Ready to seek out death in my disgrace,
      My mistress 'gan to smooth her gathered brows,
      Whereby I am reprieved for a space.
      O hope and fear! who half your torments knows?
    It is some mercy in a black-mouthed judge
      To haste his prisoner's end, if he must die.
      Dear, if all other favour you shall grudge,
      Do speedy execution with your eye;
    With one sole look you leave in me no soul!
      Count it a loss to lose a faithful slave.
      Would God, that I might hear my last bell toll,
      So in your bosom I might dig a grave!
    Doubtful delay is worse than any fever,
    Or help me soon, or cast me off for ever!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Each day, new proofs of new despair I find,
      That is, new deaths. No marvel then, though I
      Make exile my last help; to th'end mine eye
    Should not behold the death to me assigned.
    Not that from death absence might save my mind,
      But that it might take death more patiently;
      Like him, the which by judge condemned to die,
    To suffer with more ease, his eyes doth blind.
      Your lips in scarlet clad, my judges be,
    Pronouncing sentence of eternal "No!"
      Despair, the hangman that tormenteth me;
        The death I suffer is the life I have.
    For only life doth make me die in woe,
    And only death I for my pardon crave.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    The richest relic Rome did ever view
      Was' Caesar's tomb; on which, with cunning hand,
      Jove's triple honours, the three fair Graces, stand,
    Telling his virtues in their virtues true.
    This Rome admired; but dearest dear, in you
      Dwelleth the wonder of the happiest land,
      And all the world to Neptune's furthest strand,
    For what Rome shaped hath living life in you.
      Thy naked beauty, bounteously displayed,
    Enricheth monarchies of hearts with love;
      Thine eyes to hear complaints are open laid;
      Thine eyes' kind looks requite all pains I prove;
        That of my death I dare not thee accuse;
        But pride in me that baser chance refuse.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Why thus unjustly, say, my cruel fate,
      Dost thou adjudge my luckless eyes and heart,
      The one to live exiled from that sweet smart,
    Where th' other pines, imprisoned without date?
    My luckless eyes must never more debate
      Of those bright beams that eased my love apart;
      And yet my heart, bound to them with love's dart,
    Must there dwell ever to bemoan my state.
      O had mine eyes been suffered there to rest,
    Often they had my heart's unquiet eased;
      Or had my heart with banishment been blest,
    Mine eye with beauty never had been pleased!
      But since these cross effects hath fortune wrought,
      Dwell, heart, with her; eyes, view her in my thought!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Hope, like the hyaena, coming to be old,
      Alters his shape, is turned into despair.
      Pity my hoary hopes, Maid of clear mould!
      Think not that frowns can ever make thee fair.
    What harm is it to kiss, to laugh, to play?
      Beauty's no blossom, if it be not used.
      Sweet dalliance keeps the wrinkles long away;
      Repentance follows them that have refused.
    To bring you to the knowledge of your good,
      I seek, I sue. O try and then believe!
      Each image can be chaste that's carved of wood.
      You show you live, when men you do relieve.
    Iron with wearing shines; rust wasteth treasure.
    On earth but love there is no other pleasure.

TITLE The Fifth Decade 

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Ay me, poor wretch, my prayer is turned to sin!
      I say, "I love!" My mistress says "'Tis lust!"
      Thus most we lose where most we seek to win.
      Wit will make wicked what is ne'er so just.
    And yet I can supplant her false surmise.
      Lust is a fire that for an hour or twain
      Giveth a scorching blaze and then he dies;
      Love a continual furnace doth maintain.
    A furnace! Well, this a furnace may be called;
      For it burns inward, yields a smothering flame,
      Sighs which, like boiled lead's smoking vapour, scald.
      I sigh apace at echo of sighs' name.
    Long have I served; no short blaze is my love.
    Hid joys there are that maids scorn till they prove.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    I do not now complain of my disgrace,
      O cruel fair one! fair with cruel crost;
      Nor of the hour, season, time, nor place;
      Nor of my foil, for any freedom lost;
    Nor of my courage, by misfortune daunted;
      Nor of my wit, by overweening struck;
      Nor of my sense, by any sound enchanted;
      Nor of the force of fiery-pointed hook;
    Nor of the steel that sticks within my wound;
      Nor of my thoughts, by worser thoughts defaced;
      Nor of the life I labour to confound.
      But I complain, that being thus disgraced,
    Fired, feared, frantic, fettered, shot through, slain,
    My death is such as I may not complain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If ever sorrow spoke from soul that loves,
      As speaks a spirit in a man possest,
      In me her spirit speaks. My soul it moves,
      Whose sigh-swoll'n words breed whirlwinds in my breast;
    Or like the echo of a passing bell,
      Which sounding on the water seems to howl;
      So rings my heart a fearful heavy knell,
      And keeps all night in consort with the owl.
    My cheeks with a thin ice of tears are clad,
      Mine eyes like morning stars are bleared and red.
      What resteth then but I be raging mad,
      To see that she, my cares' chief conduit-head,
    When all streams else help quench my burning heart,
    Shuts up her springs and will no grace impart.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    You secret vales, you solitary fields,
      You shores forsaken and you sounding rocks!
      If ever groaning heart hath made you yield,
      Or words half spoke that sense in prison locks,
    Then 'mongst night shadows whisper out my death.
      That when myself hath sealed my lips from speaking,
      Each tell-tale echo with a weeping breath,
      May both record my truth and true love's breaking.
    You pretty flowers that smile for summer's sake,
      Pull in your heads before my wat'ry eyes
      Do turn the meadows to a standing lake,
      By whose untimely floods your glory dies!
    For lo, mine heart, resolved to moistening air,
    Feedeth mine eyes which double tear for tear.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d

    His shadow to Narcissus well presented,
      How fair he was by such attractive love!
      So if thou would'st thyself thy beauty prove,
    Vulgar breath-mirrors might have well contented,
    And to their prayers eternally consented,
      Oaths, vows and sighs, if they believe might move;
      But more thou forc'st, making my pen approve
    Thy praise to all, least any had dissented.
      When this hath wrought, thou which before wert known
    But unto some, of all art now required,
      And thine eyes' wonders wronged, because not shown
    The world, with daily orisons desired.
      Thy chaste fair gifts, with learning's breath is blown,
    And thus my pen hath made thy sweets admired.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    I am no model figure, or sign of care,
      But his eternal heart's-consuming essence,
      In whom grief's commentaries written are,
      Drawing gross passion into pure quintessence,
    Not thine eye's fire, but fire of thine eye's disdain,
      Fed by neglect of my continual grieving,
      Attracts the true life's spirit of my pain,
      And gives it thee, which gives me no relieving.
    Within thine arms sad elegies I sing;
      Unto thine eyes a true heart love-torn lay I:
      Thou smell'st from me the savours sorrows bring;
      My tears to taste my truth to touch display I.
    Lo thus each sense, dear fair one, I importune;
    But being care, thou flyest me as ill fortune.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    But being care, thou flyest me as ill fortune;--
      Care the consuming canker of the mind!
      The discord that disorders sweet hearts' tune!
      Th' abortive bastard of a coward mind!
    The lightfoot lackey that runs post by death,
      Bearing the letters which contain our end!
      The busy advocate that sells his breath,
      Denouncing worst to him, is most his friend!
    O dear, this care no interest holds in me;
      But holy care, the guardian of thy fair,
      Thine honour's champion, and thy virtue's fee,
      The zeal which thee from barbarous times shall bear,
    This care am I; this care my life hath taken.
    Dear to my soul, then leave me not forsaken!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Dear to my soul, then, leave, me not forsaken!
      Fly not! My heart within thy bosom sleepeth;
      Even from myself and sense I have betaken
      Me unto thee for whom my spirit weepeth,
    And on the shore of that salt teary sea,
      Couched in a bed of unseen seeming pleasure,
      Where in imaginary thoughts thy fair self lay;
      But being waked, robbed of my life's best treasure,
    I call the heavens, air, earth, and seas to hear
    My love, my truth, and black disdained estate,
      Beating the rocks with bellowings of despair,
      Which still with plaints my words reverberate,
    Sighing, "Alas, what shall become of me?"
    Whilst echo cries, "What shall become of me?"

RHYME a b a b a c a c d a d a e e

    Prometheus for stealing living fire
      From heaven's king, was judged eternal death;
      In self-same flame with unrelenting ire
      Bound fast to Caucasus' low foot beneath.
    So I, for stealing living beauty's fire
      Into my verse that it may always live,
      And change his forms to shapes of my desire,
      Thou beauty's queen, self sentence like dost give.
    Bound to thy feet in chains of life I lie;
      For to thine eyes I never dare aspire;
      And in thy beauty's brightness do I fry,
      As poor Prometheus in the scalding fire;
    Which tears maintain as oil the lamp revives;
    Only my succour in thy favour lies.

TITLE The Sixth Decade

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    One sun unto my life's day gives true light.
      One moon dissolves my stormy night of woes.
      One star my fate and happy fortune shows.
    One saint I serve, one shrine with vows I dight.
    One sun transfix'd hath burnt my heart outright,
      One moon opposed my love in darkness throws.
      One star hath bid my thoughts my wrongs disclose.
    Saints scorn poor swains, shrines do my vows no right.
      Yet if my love be found a holy fire,
    Pure, unstained, without idolatry,
      And she nathless in hate of my desire,
    Lives to repose her in my misery,
      My sun, my moon, my star, my saint, my shrine,
      Mine be the torment but the guilt be thine!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    To live in hell, and heaven to behold;
      To welcome life, and die a living death;
      To sweat with heat, and yet be freezing cold;
      To grasp at stars, and lie the earth beneath;
    To treat a maze that never shall have end;
      To burn in sighs, and starve in daily tears;
      To climb a hill, and never to descend;
      Giants to kill, and quake at childish fears;
    To pine for food, and watch th' Hesperian tree;
      To thirst for drink, and nectar still to draw;
      To live accurs'd whom men hold blest to be,
      And weep those wrongs which never creature saw:
    If this be love, if love in these be founded,
    My heart is love, for these in it are grounded.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    A carver, having loved too long in vain,
      Hewed out the portraiture of Venus' son
      In marble rock, upon the which did rain
      Small drizzling drops, that from a fount did run:
    Imagining the drops would either wear
      His fury out, or quench his living flame;
      But when he saw it bootless did appear,
      He swore the water did augment the same.
    So I, that seek in verse to carve thee out,
      Hoping thy beauty will my flame allay,
      Viewing my verse and poems all throughout,
      Find my will rather to my love obey,
    That with the carver I my work do blame,
    Finding it still th' augmenter of my flame.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Astronomers the heavens do divide
      Into eight houses, where the god remains;
      All which in thy perfections do abide.
      For in thy feet, the queen of silence reigns;
    About thy waist Jove's messenger doth dwell,
      Inchanting me as I thereat admire;
      And on thy dugs the queen of love doth tell
      Her godhead's power in scrolls of my desire;
    Thy beauty is the world's eternal sun;
      Thy favours force a coward's heart to dare,
      And in thy hairs Jove and his riches won.
      Thy frowns hold Saturn; thine's the fixed stars.
    Pardon me then, divine, to love thee well,
    Since thou art heaven, and I in heaven would dwell!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Weary of love, my thoughts of love complained,
      Till reason told them there was no such power,
      And bade me view fair beauty's richest flower,
    To see if there a naked boy remained.
    Dear, to thine eyes, eyes that my soul hath pained,
      Thoughts turned them back in that unhappy hour
      To see if love kept there his royal bower,
    For if not there, then no place him contained.
      There was he not, nor boy, nor golden bow;
    Yet as thou turned thy chaste fair eye aside,
      A flame of fire did from thine eyelids go,
    Which burnt my heart through my sore wounded side;
      Then with a sigh, reason made thoughts to cry,
      "There is no god of love, save that thine eye!"

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Forgive me, dear, for thundering on thy name;
      Sure 'tis thyself that shows my love distrest.
      For fire exhaled in freezing clouds possessed,
    Warring for way, makes all the heavens exclaim.
    Thy beauty so, the brightest living flame,
      Wrapt in my cloudy heart, by winter prest,
      Scorning to dwell within so base a nest,
    Thunders in me thy everlasting flame.
      O that my heart might still contain that fire!
    Or that the fire would always light my heart!
      Then should'st thou not disdain my true desire,
    Or think I wronged thee to reveal to my smart;
      For as the fire through freezing clouds doth break,
      So not myself but thou in me would'st speak.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    My heart mine eye accuseth of his death,
      Saying his wanton sight bred his unrest;
      Mine eye affirms my heart's unconstant faith
      Hath been his bane, and all his joys repressed.
    My heart avows mine eye let in the fire,
      Which burns him with an everliving light.
      Mine eye replies my greedy heart's desire
      Let in those floods, which drown him day and night.
    Thus wars my heart which reason doth maintain,
      And calls my eye to combat if he dare,
      The whilst my soul impatient of disdain,
      Wrings from his bondage unto death more near;
    Save that my love still holdeth him in hand;
    A kingdom thus divided cannot stand!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c e e

    Unhappy day, unhappy month and season,
      When first proud love, my joys away adjourning,
      Poured into mine eye to her eye turning
    A deadly juice, unto my green thought's reason.
    Prisoner I am unto the eye I gaze on;
      Eternally my love's flame is in burning;
      A mortal shaft still wounds me in my mourning;
    Thus prisoned, burnt and slain, the spirit, soul and reason.
      What tides me then since these pains which annoy me,
    In my despair are evermore increasing?
    The more I love, less is my pain's releasing;
      That cursed be the fortune which destroys me,
    The hour, the month, the season, and the cause,
    When love first made me thrall to lovers' laws.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c e e

    Love hath I followed all too long, nought gaining;
      And sighed I have in vain to sweet what smarteth,
      But from his brow a fiery arrow parteth,
    Thinking that I should him resist not plaining.
    But cowardly my heart submiss remaining,
      Yields to receive what shaft thy fair eye darteth.
      Well do I see thine eye my bale imparteth,
    And that save death no hope I am detaining.
    For what is he can alter fortune's sliding?
      One in his bed consumes his life away,
      Other in wars, another in the sea;
    The like effects in me have their abiding;
      For heavens avowed my fortune should be such,
      That I should die by loving far too much.

RHYME a b b a c d d c e f f e g g

    My God, my God, how much I love my goddess,
      Whose virtues rare, unto the heavens arise!
      My God, my God, how much I love her eyes
      One shining bright, the other full of hardness!
    My God, my God, how much I love her wisdom,
      Whose works may ravish heaven's richest maker!
      Of whose eyes' joys if I might be partaker
      Then to my soul a holy rest would come.
    My God, how much I love to hear her speak!
      Whose hands I kiss and ravished oft rekisseth,
      When she stands wotless whom so much she blesseth.
      Say then, what mind this honest love would break;
    Since her perfections pure, withouten blot,
    Makes her beloved of thee, she knoweth not?

TITLE The Seventh Decade

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    The first created held a joyous bower,
      A flowering field, the world's sole wonderment,
      High Paradise, from whence a woman's power
      Enticed him to fall to endless banishment.
    This on the banks of Euphrates did stand,
      Till the first Mover, by his wondrous might,
      Planted it in thine eyes, thy face, thy hands,
      From whence the world receives his fairest light.
    Thy cheeks contain choice flowers; thy eyes, two suns;
      Thy hands, the fruit that no life blood can stain;
      And in thy breath, that heavenly music wons,
      Which, when thou speak'st, angels their voices strain.
    As from the first thy sex exiled me,
    So to this next let me be called by thee!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    Fair grace of graces, muse of muses all,
      Thou Paradise, thou only heaven I know!
      What influence hath bred my hateful woe,
    That I from thee and them am forced to fall?
    Thou falled from me, from thee I never shall,
      Although my fortunes thou hast brought so low;
      Yet shall my faith and service with thee go,
    For live I do, on heaven and thee to call.
    Banish'd all grace, no graces with me dwell;
      Compelled to muse, my muses from me fly;
      Excluded heaven, what can remain but hell?
      Exiled from paradise, in hate I lie,
    Cursing my stars; albeit I find it true,
    I lost all these when I lost love and you.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    What viewed I, dear, when I thine eyes beheld?
      Love in his glory? No, him Thyrsis saw,
      And stood the boy, whilst he his darts did draw,
    Whose painted pride to baser swains he telled.
    Saw I two suns? That sight is seen but seld.
      Yet can their brood that teach the holy law
      Gaze on their beams, and dread them not a straw,
    Where princely looks are by their eyes repelled.
      What saw I then? Doubtless it was Amen,
      Armed with strong thunder and a lightning's flame,
      Who bridegroom like with power was riding then,
    Meaning that none should see him when he came.
      Yet did I gaze; and thereby caught the wound
      Which burns my heart and keeps my body sound.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    When tedious much and over weary long,
      Cruel disdain reflecting from her brow,
      Hath been the cause that I endured such wrong
      And rest thus discontent and weary now.
    Yet when posterity in time to come,
      Shall find th' uncancelled tenour of her vow,
      And her disdain be then confessed of some,
      How much unkind and long, I find it now,
    O yet even then--though then will be too late
      To comfort me; dead, many a day, ere then--
      They shall confess I did not force her heart;
      And time shall make it known to other men
    That ne'er had her disdain made me despair,
    Had she not been so excellently fair.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Had she not been so excellently fair,
      My muse had never mourned in lines of woe;
      But I did too inestimable weigh her,
      And that's the cause I now lament me so.
    Yet not for her contempt do I complain me:
      Complaints may ease the mind, but that is all;
      Therefore though she too constantly disdain me,
      I can but sigh and grieve, and so I shall.
    Yet grieve I not because I must grieve ever;
      And yet, alas, waste tears away, in vain;
      I am resolved truly to persever,
      Though she persisteth in her old disdain.
    But that which grieves me most is that I see
    Those which most fair, the most unkindest be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f f g g

    Thus long imposed to everlasting plaining,
      Divinely constant to the worthiest fair,
      And moved by eternally disdaining,
      Aye to persever in unkind despair:
    Because now silence wearily confined
      In tedious dying and a dumb restraint,
      Breaks forth in tears from mine unable mind
      To ease her passion by a poor complaint;
    O do not therefore to thyself suggest
      That I can grieve to have immured so long
      Upon the matter of mine own unrest;
      Such grief is not the tenour of my song,
      That 'bide so zealously so bad a wrong.
    My grief is this; unless I speak and plain me,
    Thou wilt persever ever to disdain me.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f f g g

    Thou wilt persever ever to disdain me;
      And I shall then die, when thou will repent it.
      O do not therefore from complaint restrain me,
      And take my life from me, to me that lent it!
    For whilst these accents, weepingly exprest
      In humble lines of reverentest zeal,
      Have issue to complaint from mine unrest,
      They but thy beauty's wonder shall reveal;
    And though the grieved muse of some other lover,
      Whose less devotions knew but woes like mine,
      Would rather seek occasion to discover
      How little pitiful and how much unkind,
      They other not so worthy beauties find.
    O, I not so! but seek with humble prayer,
    Means how to move th' unmercifullest fair.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    As draws the golden meteor of the day
      Exhaled matter from the ground to heaven,
      And by his secret nature, there to stay
      The thing fast held, and yet of hold bereaven;
    So by th' attractive excellence and might,
      Born to the power of thy transparent eyes,
      Drawn from myself, ravished with thy delight,
      Whose dumb conceits divinely sirenise,
    Lo, in suspense of fear and hope upholden,
      Diversely poised with passions that pain me,
      No resolution dares my thoughts embolden,
      Since 'tis not I, but thou that dost sustain me.
    O if there's none but thou can work my woe,
    Wilt thou be still unkind and kill me so?

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Wilt thou be still unkind and kill me so,
      Whose humbled vows with sorrowful appeal
      Do still persist, and did so long ago
      Intreat for pity with so pure a zeal?
    Suffice the world shall, for the world can say
      How much thy power hath power, and what it can;
      Never was victor-hand yet moved to slay
      The rendered captive, or the yielding man.
    Then, O, why should thy woman-thought impose
      Death and disdain on him that yields his breath,
      To free his soul from discontent and woes,
      And humble sacrifice to a certain death?
    O since the world knows what the power can do,
    What were't for thee to save and love me too?

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    I meet not mine by others' discontent,
      For none compares with me in true devotion;
      Yet though my tears and sighs to her be spent,
      Her cruel heart disdains what they do motion.
    Yet though persisting in eternal hate,
      To aggravate the cause of my complaining,
      Her fury ne'er confineth with a date,
      I will not cease to love, for her disdaining.
    Such puny thoughts of unresolved ground,
      Whose inaudacity dares but base conceit,
      In me and my love never shall be found.
      Those coward thoughts unworthy minds await.
    But those that love well have not yet begun;
    Persever ever and have never done!

TITLE The Eighth Decade

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Persever ever and have never done,
      You weeping accent of my weary song!
      O do not you eternal passions shun,
      But be you true and everlasting long!
    Say that she doth requite you with disdain;
      Yet fortified with hope, endure your fortune;
      Though cruel now she will be kind again;
      Such haps as those, such loves as yours importune.
    Though she protests the faithfullest severity
      Inexecrable beauty is inflicting,
      Kindness in time will pity your sincerity,
      Though now it be your fortune's interdicting.
    For some can say, whose loves have known like passion,
    "Women are kind by kind, and coy for fashion."

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Give period to my matter of complaining,
      Fair wonder of our time's admiring eye,
      And entertain no more thy long disdaining,
      Or give me leave at last that I may die.
    For who can live, perpetually secluded
      From death to life, that loathes her discontent?
      Lest by some hope seducively deluded,
      Such thoughts aspire to fortunate event;
    But I that now have drawn mal-pleasant breath
      Under the burden of thy cruel hate,
      O, I must long and linger after death,
      And yet I dare not give my life her date;
    For if I die and thou repent t' have slain me,
    'Twill grieve me more than if thou didst disdain me.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    'Twill grieve me more than if thou didst disdain me,
      That I should die; and thou, because I die so.
      And yet to die, it should not know to pain me,
      If cruel beauty were content to bid so.
    Death to my life, life to my long despair
      Prolonged by her, given to my love and days,
      Are means to tell how truly she is fair,
      And I can die to testify her praise.
    Yet not to die, though fairness me despiseth,
      Is cause why in complaint I thus persever;
      Though death me and my love inparadiseth,
      By interdicting me from her for ever.
    I do not grieve that I am forced to die,
    But die to think upon the reason why.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    My tears are true. Though others be divine,
      And sing of wars and Troy's new rising frame,
      Meeting heroic feet in every line,
      That tread high measures in the scene of fame,
    And I, though disaccustoming my muse,
      And sing but low songs in an humble vein,
      May one day raise my style as others use,
      And turn Elizon to a higher strain.
    When re-intombing from oblivious ages
      In better stanzas her surviving wonder,
      I may opposed against the monster rage
      That part desert and excellence asunder;
    That she though coy may yet survive to see,
    Her beauty's wonder lives again in me.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c e e

    Sometimes in verse I praised, sometimes in verse sighed;
      No more shall pen with love and beauty mell,
      But to my heart alone my heart shall tell
    How unseen flames do burn it day and night,
    Lest flames give light, light bring my love to sight,
      And my love prove my folly to excel.
      Wherefore my love burns like the fire of hell,
    Wherein is fire and yet there is no light;
      For if one never loved like me, then why
    Skill-less blames he the thing he doth not know?
    And he that so hath loved should favour show,
      For he hath been a fool as well as I.
    Thus shall henceforth more pain, more folly have;
    And folly past, may justly pardon crave.

TITLE A CALCULATION UPON THE BIRTH OF AN HONOURABLE LADY'S DAUGHTER, BORN IN THE YEAR 1588 AND ON A FRIDAY

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c e e

    Fair by inheritance, whom born we see
      Both in the wondrous year and on the day
      Wherein the fairest planet beareth sway,
    The heavens to thee this fortune doth decree!
    Thou of a world of hearts in time shall be
      A monarch great, and with one beauty's ray
      So many hosts of hearts thy face shall slay,
    As all the rest for love shall yield to thee,
      But even as Alexander when he knew
      His father's conquests wept, lest he should leave
      No kingdom unto him for to subdue:
    So shall thy mother thee of praise bereave;
      So many hearts already she hath slain,
      As few behind to conquer shall remain.

TITLE SONNETS FROM THE MANUSCRIPT EDITION, NOT FOUND IN THAT OF 1594

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c e e

    Delight in your bright eyes my death did breed,
      As light and glittering weapons babes allure
      To play with fire and sword, and so procure
    Then to be burnt and hurt ere they take heed,
    Thy beauty so hath made me burn and bleed;
      Yet shall my ashes and my blood assure
      Thy beauty's fame forever to endure;
    For thy fame's life from my death doth proceed;
      Because my heart to ashes burned giveth
    Life to thy fame, thou right a phoenix art,
      And like a pelican thy beauty liveth
    By sucking blood out of my breast and heart.
      Lo why with wonder we may thee compare
      Unto the pelican and phoenix rare!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c e e

    Eyes curious to behold what nature can create,
      Come see, come see, and write what wonder you do see,
      Causing by true report our next posterity
    Curse fortune for that they were born too late!
    Come then and come ye all, come soon lest that
      The time should be too short and men too few should be;
      For all be few to write her least part's history,
    Though they should ever write and never write but that.
      Millions look on her eyes, millions think on her wit,
    Millions speak of her, millions write of her hand.
    The whole eye on the lip I do not understand;
      Millions too few to praise but some one part of it,
    As either of her eye or lip or hand to write,
    The light or black, the taste or red, the soft or white.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c c d e d e

    Lady of ladies, the delight alone
      For which to heaven earth doth no envy bear;
      Seeing and hearing thee, we see and hear
    Such voice, such light, as never sung nor shone.
    The want of heaven I grant yet we may moan,
      Not for the pleasure of the angels there,
      As though in face or voice they like thee were,
    But that they many be, and thou but one.
      The basest notes which from thy voice proceed,
      The treble of the angels do exceed,
    So that I fear their choir to beautify,
      Lest thou to some in heaven shall sing and shine.
    Lo, when I hear thee sing, the reason why
      Sighs of my breast keep time with notes of thine!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Not that thy hand is soft, is sweet, is white,
      Thy lips sweet roses, breast sweet lily is,
      That love esteems these three the chiefest bliss
    Which nature ever made for lips' delight;
    But when these three to show their heavenly might
      Such wonders do, devotion then for this
      Commandeth us with humble zeal to kiss
    Such things as work miracles in our sight.
    A lute of senseless wood, by nature dumb,
      Touched by thy hand doth speak divinely well;
    And from thy lips and breast sweet tunes do come
        To my dead heart, the which new life do give.
      Of greater wonders heard we never tell
        Than for the dumb to speak, the dead to live.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d e e

    When beauty to the world vouchsafes this bliss,
      To show the one whose other there is not,
      The whitest skins red blushing shame doth blot,
    And in the reddest cheeks pale envy is.
    The fair and foul come thus alike by this;
      For when the sun hath our horizon got,
      Venus herself doth shine no more, God wot,
    Than the least star that takes the light from his.
      The poor in beauty thus content remain
    To see their jealous cause revenged in thee,
      And their fair foes afflicted with like pain.
    Lo, the clear proof of thy divinity;
      For unto God is only due this praise
      The highest to pluck down, the low to raise!

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Miracle of the world! I never will deny
      That former poets praise the beauty of their days;
      But all those beauties were but figures of thy praise,
    And all those poets did of thee but prophesy.
    Thy coming to the world hath taught us to descry
      What Petrarch's Laura meant, for truth the lip bewrays.
      Lo, why th' Italians, yet which never saw thy rays,
    To find out Petrarch's sense such forged glosses try!
    The beauties which he in a veil enclosed beheld
      But revelations were within his surest heart
    By which in parables thy coming he foretold;
        His songs were hymns of thee, which only now before
      Thy image should be sung; for thou that goddess art
        Which only we without idolatry adore.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d e c d e

    Now, now I love indeed, and suffer more
      In one day now then I did in a year;
      Great flames they be which but small sparkles were,
    And wounded now, I was but pricked before.
    No marvel then, though more than heretofore
      I weep and sigh; how can great wounds be there
      Where moisture runs not out? and ever, where
    The fire is great, of smoke there must be store.
    My heart was hitherto but like green wood,
      Which must be dried before it will burn bright;
        My former love served but my heart to dry;
    Now Cupid for his fire doth find it good:
      For now it burneth clear, and shall give light
        For all the world your beauty to espy.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e

    Dear, though from me your gratious looks depart,
      And of that comfort do myself bereave,
      Which both I did deserve and did receive,
    Triumph not over much in this my smart.
    Nay, rather they which now enjoy thy heart
      For fear just cause of mourning should conceive,
      Lest thou inconstant shouldst their trust deceive
    Which like unto the weather changing art.
    For in foul weather birds sing often will
      In hope of fair, and in fair time will cease,
    For fear fair time should not continue still;
        So they may mourn which have thy heart possessed
      For fear of change, and hope of change may ease
        Their hearts whom grief of change doth now molest.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c c d e d e

    If ever any justly might complain
      Of unrequited service, it is I;
      Change is the thanks I have for loyalty,
    And only her reward is her disdain;
    So as just spite did almost me constrain,
      Through torment her due praises to deny,
      For he which vexed is with injury
    By speaking ill doth ease his heart of pain.
      But what, shall torture make me wrong her name?
      No, no, a pris'ner constant thinks it shame,
      Though he (were) racked his first truth to gainsay.
        Her true given praise my first confession is;
      Though her disdain do rack me night and day,
        This I confessed, and will deny in this.


RHYME a b a b b c c

It chaunced me on day beside the shore
Of siluer streaming Thamesis to bee,
Nigh where the goodly Verlame stood of yore,
Of which there now remaines no memorie,
Nor anie little moniment to see,
By which the trauailer, that fares that way,
This once was she, may warned be to say.

RHYME a b a b b c c

There on the other side, I did behold
A Woman sitting sorrowfullie wailing,
Rending her yeolow locks, like wyrie golde,
About her shoulders careleslie downe trailing,
And streames of teares from her faire eyes forth railing.
In her right hand a broken rod she held,
Which towards heauen shee seemd on high to weld.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Whether she were one of that Riuers Nymphes,
Which did the losse of some dere loue lament,
I doubt; or one of those three fatall Impes,
Which draw the dayes of men forth in extent;
Or th'auncient Genius of that Citie brent:
But seeing her so piteouslie perplexed,
I (to her calling) askt what her so vexed.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Ah what delight (quoth she) in earthlie thing,
Or comfort can I wretched creature haue?
Whose happines the heauens enuying,
From highest staire to lowest step me draue,
And haue in mine owne bowels made my graue,
That of all Nations now I am forlorne,
The worlds sad spectacle, and fortunes scorne.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Much was I mooued at her piteous plaint,
And felt my heart nigh riuen in my brest
With tender ruth to see her sore constraint,
That shedding teares a while I still did rest,
And after did her name of her request.
Name haue I none (quoth she) nor anie being,
Bereft of both by Fates vniust decreeing.

RHYME a b a b b c c

I was that Citie, which the garland wore
Of Britaines pride, deliuered vnto me
By Romane Victors, which it wonne of yore;
Though nought at all but ruines now I bee,
And lye in mine owne ashes, as ye see:
Verlame I was; what bootes it that I was,
Sith now I am but weedes and wastfull gras?

RHYME a b a b b c c

O vaine worlds glorie, and vnstedfast state
Of all that liues, on face of sinfull earth,
Which from their first vntill their vtmost date
Tast no one hower of happines or merth,
But like as at the ingate of their berth,
They crying creep out of their mothers woomb,
So wailing backe go to their wofull toomb.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Why then dooth flesh, a bubble glas of breath,
Hunt after honour and aduauncement vaine,
And reare a trophee for deuouring death,
With so great labour and long lasting paine,
As if his daies for euer should remaine?
Sith all that in this world is great or gaie,
Doth as a vapour vanish, and decaie.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Looke backe, who list, vnto the former ages,
And call to count, what is of them become:
Where be those learned wits and antique Sages,
Which of all wisedome knew the perfect somme:
Where those great warriors, which did ouercomme
The world with conquest of their might and maine,
And made one meare of th'earth and of their raine?

RHYME a b a b b c c

What nowe is of th'Assyrian Lyonesse,
Of whome no footing now on earth appeares?
What of the Persian Beares outragiousnesse,
Whose memorie is quite worne out with yeares?
Who of the Grecian Libbard now ought heares,
That ouerran the East with greedie powre,
And left his whelps their kingdomes to deuoure?

RHYME a b a b b c c

And where is that same great seuen headded beast,
That made all nations vassals of her pride,
To fall before her feete at her beheast,
And in the necke of all the world did ride?
Where doth she all that wondrous welth nowe hide?
With her own weight down pressed now shee lies,
And by her heaps her hugenesse testifies.

RHYME a b a b b c c

O Rome thy ruine I lament and rue,
And in thy fall my fatall ouerthrowe,
That whilom was, whilst heauens with equall vewe
Deignd to behold me, and their gifts bestowe,
The picture of thy pride in pompous shew:
And of the whole world as thou wast the Empresse,
So I of this small Northerne world was Princesse.

RHYME a b a b b c c

To tell the beawtie of my buildings fayre,
Adornd with purest golde, and precious stone;
To tell my riches, and endowments rare
That by my foes are now all spent and gone:
To tell my forces matchable to none,
Were but lost labour, that few would beleeue,
And with rehearsing would me more agreeue.

RHYME a b a b b c c

High towers, faire temples, goodly theaters,
Strong walls, rich porches, princelie pallaces,
Large streetes, braue houses, sacred sepulchers,
Sure gates, sweete gardens, stately galleries,
Wrought with faire pillours, and fine imageries,
All those (O pitie) now are turnd to dust,
And ouergrowen with blacke obliuions rust.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Theretoo for warlike power, and peoples store,
In Britannie was none to match with mee;
That manie often did abie full sore:
Ne Troynouant, though elder sister shee,
With my great forces might compared bee;
That stout Pendragon to his perill felt,
Who in a siege seauen yeres about me dwelt.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But long ere this Bunduca Britonnesse
Her mightie hoast against my bulwarkes brought,
Bunduca, that victorious conqueresse,
That lifting vp her braue hero√Øck thought
Boue womens weaknes, with the Romanes fought,
Fought, and in field against them thrice preuailed:
Yet was she foyld, when as she me assailed.

RHYME a b a b b c c

And though at last by force I conquered were
Of hardie Saxons, and became their thrall;
Yet was I with much bloodshed bought full deere,
And prizde with slaughter of their Generall:
The moniment of whose sad funerall,
For wonder of the world, long in me lasted;
But now to nought through spoyle of time is wasted.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Wasted it is, as if it neuer were,
And all the rest that me so honord made,
And of the world admired eu'rie where,
Is turnd to smoake, that doth to nothing fade;
And of that brightnes now appeares no shade,
But greislie shades, such as doo haunt in hell
With fearfull fiends, that in deep darknes dwell.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Where my high steeples whilom vsde to stand,
On which the lordly Faulcon wont to towre,
There now is but an heap of lyme and sand,
For the Shriche-owle to build her balefull bowre:
And where the Nightingale wont forth to powre
Her restles plaints, to comfort wakefull Louers,
There now haunt yelling Mewes and whining Plouers.

RHYME a b a b b c c

And where the christall Thamis wont to slide
In siluer channell, downe along the Lee,
About whose flowrie bankes on either side
A thousand Nymphes, with mirthfull iollitee
Were wont to play, from all annoyance free;
There now no riuers course is to be seene,
But moorish fennes, and marshes euer greene.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Seemes, that that gentle Riuer for great griefe
Of my mishaps, which oft I to him plained;
Or for to shunne the horrible mischiefe,
With which he saw my cruell foes me pained,
And his pure streames with guiltles blood oft stained,
From my vnhappie neighborhood farre fled,
And his sweete waters away with him led.

RHYME a b a b b c c

There also where the winged ships were seene
In liquid waues to cut their fomie waie,
And thousand Fishers numbred to haue been,
In that wide lake looking for plenteous praie
Of fish, which they with baits vsde to betraie,
Is now no lake, nor anie fishers store,
Nor euer ship shall saile there anie more.

RHYME a b a b b c c

They all are gone, and all with them is gone,
Ne ought to me remaines, but to lament
My long decay, which no man els doth mone,
And mourne my fall with dolefull dreriment.
Yet it is comfort in great languishment,
To be bemoned with compassion kinde,
And mitigates the anguish of the minde.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But me no man bewaileth, but in game,
Ne sheddeth teares from lamentable eie:
Nor anie liues that mentioneth my name
To be remembred of posteritie,
Saue One that maugre fortunes iniurie,
And times decay, and enuies cruell tort,
Hath writ my record in true-seeming sort.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Cambden the nourice of antiquitie,
And lanterne vnto late succeeding age,
To see the light of simple veritie,
Buried in ruines, through the great outrage
Of her owne people, led with warlike rage;
Cambden, though time all moniments obscure,
Yet thy iust labours euer shall endure.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But whie (vnhappie wight) doo I thus crie,
And grieue that my remembrance quite is raced
Out of the knowledge of posteritie,
And all my antique moniments defaced?
Sith I doo dailie see things highest placed,
So soone as fates their vitall thred haue shorne,
Forgotten quite as they were neuer borne.

RHYME a b a b b c c

It is not long, since these two eyes beheld
A mightie Prince, of most renowmed race,
Whom England high in count of honour held,
And greatest ones did sue to gaine his grace;
Of greatest ones he greatest in his place,
Sate in the bosome of his Soueraine,
And Right and loyall did his word maintaine.

RHYME a b a b b c c

I saw him die, I saw him die, as one
Of the meane people, and brought foorth on beare,
I saw him die, and no man left to mone
His dolefull fate, that late him loued deare:
Scarse anie left to close his eylids neare;
Scarse anie left vpon his lips to laie
The sacred sod, or Requiem to saie.

RHYME a b a b b c c

O trustlesse state of miserable men,
That builde your blis on hope of earthly thing,
And vainly thinke your selues halfe happie then,
When painted faces with smooth flattering
Doo fawne on you, and your wide praises sing,
And when the courting masker louteth lowe,
Him true in heart and trustie to you trow.

RHYME a b a b b c c

All is but fained, and with oaker dide,
That euerie shower will wash and wipe away,
All things doo change that vnder heauen abide,
And after death all friendship doth decaie.
Therefore what euer man bearst worldlie sway,
Liuing, on God, and on thy selfe relie;
For when thou diest, all shall with thee die.

RHYME a b a b b c c

He now is dead, and all is with him dead,
Saue what in heauens storehouse he vplaid:
His hope is faild, and come to passe his dread,
And euill men now dead, his deeds vpbraid:
Spite bites the dead, that liuing neuer baid.
He now is gone, the whiles the Foxe is crept
Into the hole, the which the Badger swept.

RHYME a b a b b c c

He now is dead, and all his glorie gone,
And all his greatnes vapoured to nought,
That as a glasse vpon the water shone,
Which vanisht quite, so soone as it was sought:
His name is worne alreadie out of thought,
Ne anie Poet seekes him to reuiue;
Yet manie Poets honourd him aliue.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Ne doth his Colin, carelesse Colin Cloute,
Care now his idle bagpipe vp to raise,
Ne tell his sorrow to the listning rout
Of shepherd groomes, which wont his songs to praise:
Praise who so list, yet I will him dispraise,
Vntill he quite him of this guiltie blame:
Wake shepheards boy, at length awake for shame.

RHYME a b a b b c c

And who so els did goodnes by him gaine,
And who so els his bounteous minde did trie,
Whether he shepheard be, or shepheards swaine,
(For manie did, which doo it now denie)
Awake, and to his Song a part applie:
And I, the whilest you mourne for his decease,
Will with my mourning plaints your plaint increase.

RHYME a b a b b c c

He dyde, and after him his brother dyde,
His brother Prince, his brother noble Peere,
That whilste he liued, was of none enuyde,
And dead is now, as liuing, counted deare,
Deare vnto all that true affection beare:
But vnto thee most deare, O dearest Dame,
His noble Spouse, and Paragon of fame.

RHYME a b a b b c c

He whilest he liued, happie was through thee,
And being dead is happie now much more;
Liuing, that lincked chaunst with thee to bee,
And dead, because him dead thou dost adore
As liuing, and thy lost deare loue deplore.
So whilst that thou, faire flower of chastitie,
Dost liue, by thee thy Lord shall neuer die.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Thy Lord shall neuer die, the whiles this verse
Shall liue, and surely it shall liue for euer:
For euer it shall liue, and shall rehearse
His worthie praise, and vertues dying neuer,
Though death his soule doo from his bodie seuer.
And thou thy selfe herein shalt also liue;
Such grace the heauens doo to my verses giue.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Ne shall his sister, ne thy father die,
Thy father, that good Earle of rare renowne,
And noble Patrone of weake pouertie;
Whose great good deeds in countrey and in towne
Haue purchast him in heauen an happie crowne;
Where he now liueth in eternall blis,
And left his sonne t'ensue those steps of his.

RHYME a b a b b c c

He noble bud, his Grandsires liuelie hayre,
Vnder the shadow of thy countenaunce
Now ginnes to shoote vp fast, and flourish fayre
In learned artes and goodlie gouernaunce,
That him to highest honour shall aduaunce.
Braue Impe of Bedford, grow apace in bountie,
And count of wisedome more than of thy Countie.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Ne may I let thy husbands sister die,
That goodly Ladie, sith she eke did spring
Out of this stocke, and famous familie,
Whose praises I to future age doo sing,
And foorth out of her happie womb did bring
The sacred brood of learning and all honour;
In whom the heauens powrde all their gifts vpon her.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Most gentle spirite breathed from aboue,
Out of the bosome of the makers blis,
In whom all bountie and all vertuous loue
Appeared in their natiue propertis,
And did enrich that noble breast of his,
With treasure passing all this worldes worth,
Worthie of heauen it selfe, which brought it forth.

RHYME a b a b b c c

His blessed spirite full of power diuine
And influence of all celestiall grace,
Loathing this sinfull earth and earthlie slime,
Fled backe too soone vnto his natiue place,
Too soone for all that did his loue embrace,
Too soone for all this wretched world, whom he
Robd of all right and true nobilitie.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Yet ere his happie soule to heauen went
Out of this fleshlie goale, he did deuise
Vnto his heauenlie maker to present
His bodie, as a spotles sacrifise;
And chose, that guiltie hands of enemies
Should powre forth th'offring of his guiltles blood:
So life exchanging for his countries good.

RHYME a b a b b c c

O noble spirite, liue there euer blessed,
The worlds late wonder, and the heauens new ioy,
Liue euer there, and leaue me here distressed
With mortall cares, and cumbrous worlds anoy.
But where thou dost that happines enioy,
Bid me, O bid me quicklie come to thee,
That happie there I maie thee alwaies see.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Yet whilest the fates affoord me vitall breath,
I will it spend in speaking of thy praise,
And sing to thee, vntill that timelie death
By heauens doome doo ende my earthlie daies:
Thereto doo thou my humble spirite raise,
And into me that sacred breath inspire,
Which thou there breathest perfect and entire.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Then will I sing, but who can better sing,
Than thine owne sister, peerles Ladie bright,
Which to thee sings with deep harts sorrowing,
Sorrowing tempered with deare delight,
That her to heare I feele my feeble spright
Robbed of sense, and rauished with ioy,
O sad ioy made of mourning and anoy.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Yet will I sing, but who can better sing,
Than thou thy selfe, thine owne selfes valiance,
That whilest thou liuedst, madest the forrests ring,
And fields resownd, and flockes to leap and daunce,
And shepheards leaue their lambs vnto mischaunce,
To runne thy shrill Arcadian Pipe to heare:
O happie were those dayes, thrice happie were.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But now more happie thou, and wretched wee,
Which want the wonted sweetnes of thy voice,
Whiles thou now in Elisian fields so free,
With Orpheus, and with Linus, and the choice
Of all that euer did in rimes reioyce,
Conuersest, and doost heare their heauenlie layes,
And they heare thine, and thine doo better praise.

RHYME a b a b b c c

So there thou liuest, singing euermore,
And here thou liuest, being euer song
Of vs, which liuing loued thee afore,
And now thee worship, mongst that blessed throng
Of heauenlie Poets and Heroes strong.
So thou both here and there immortall art,
And euerie where through excellent desart.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But such as neither of themselues can sing,
Nor yet are sung of others for reward,
Die in obscure obliuion, as the thing
Which neuer was, ne euer with regard
Their names shall of the later age be heard,
But shall in rustie darknes euer lie,
Vnles they mentiond be with infamie.

RHYME a b a b b c c

What booteth it to haue been rich aliue?
What to be great? what to be gracious?
When after death no token doth suruiue,
Of former being in this mortall hous,
But sleepes in dust dead and inglorious,
Like beast, whose breath but in his nostrels is,
And hath no hope of happinesse or blis.

RHYME a b a b b c c

How manie great ones may remembred be,
Which in their daies most famouslie did florish;
Of whome no word we heare, nor signe now see,
But as things wipt out with a sponge do perishe,
Because they liuing, cared not to cherishe
No gentle wits, through pride or couetize,
Which might their names for euer memorize.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Prouide therefore (ye Princes) whilst ye liue,
That of the Muses ye may friended bee,
Which vnto men eternitie do giue;
For they be daughters of Dame memorie,
And Ioue the father of eternitie,
And do those men in golden thrones repose,
Whose merits they to glorifie do chose.

RHYME a b a b b c c

The seuen fold yron gates of grislie Hell,
And horrid house of sad Proserpina,
They able are with power of mightie spell
To breake, and thence the soules to bring awaie
Out of dread darkenesse, to eternall day,
And them immortall make, which els would die
In foule forgetfulnesse, and nameles lie.

RHYME a b a b b c c

So whilome raised they the puissant brood
Of golden girt Alcmena, for great merite,
Out of the dust, to which the Oetaean wood
Had him consum'd, and spent his vitall spirite:
To highest heauen, where now he doth inherite
All happinesse in Hebes siluer bowre,
Chosen to be her dearest Paramoure.

RHYME a b a b b c c

So raisde they eke faire Ledaes warlick twinnes,
And interchanged life vnto them lent,
That when th'one dies, th'other then beginnes
To shew in Heauen his brightnes orient;
And they, for pittie of the sad wayment,
Which Orpheus for Eurydice did make,
Her back againe to life sent for his sake.

RHYME a b a b b c c

So happie are they, and so fortunate,
Whom the Pierian sacred sisters loue,
That freed from bands of impacable fate,
And power of death, they liue for aye aboue,
Where mortall wreakes their blis may not remoue:
But with the Gods, for former vertues meede,
On Nectar and Ambrosia do feede.

RHYME a b a b b c c

For deeds doe die, how euer noblie donne,
And thoughts of men do as themselues decay,
But wise wordes taught in numbers for to runne,
Recorded by the Muses, liue for ay;
Ne may with storming showers be washt away,
Ne bitter breathing windes with harmfull blast,
Nor age, nor enuie shall them euer wast.

RHYME a b a b b c c

In vaine doo earthly Princes then, in vaine
Seeke with Pyramides, to heauen aspired;
Or huge Colosses, built with costlie paine;
Or brasen Pillours, neuer to be fired,
Or Shrines, made of the mettall most desired;
To make their memories for euer liue:
For how can mortall immortalitie giue?

RHYME a b a b b c c

Such one Mausolus made, the worlds great wonder,
But now no remnant doth thereof remaine:
Such one Marcellus, but was torne with thunder:
Such one Lisippus, but is worne with raine:
Such one King Edmond, but was rent for gaine.
All such vaine moniments of earthlie masse,
Deuour'd of Time, in time to nought doo passe.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But fame with golden wings aloft doth flie,
Aboue the reach of ruinous decay,
And with braue plumes doth beate the azure skie,
Admir'd of base-borne men from farre away:
Then who so will with vertuous deeds assay
To mount to heauen, on Pegasus must ride,
And with sweete Poets verse be glorifide.

RHYME a b a b b c c

For not to haue been dipt in Lethe lake,
Could saue the sonne of Thetis from to die;
But that blinde bard did him immortall make
With verses, dipt in deaw of Castalie:
Which made the Easterne Conquerour to crie,
O fortunate yong-man, whose vertue found
So braue a Trompe, thy noble acts to sound.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Therefore in this halfe happie I doo read
Good Melibae, that hath a Poet got,
To sing his liuing praises being dead,
Deseruing neuer here to be forgot,
In spight of enuie, that his deeds would spot:
Since whose decease, learning lies vnregarded,
And men of armes doo wander vnrewarded.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Those two be those two great calamities,
That long agoe did grieue the noble spright
Of Salomon with great indignities;
Who whilome was aliue the wisest wight.
But now his wisedome is disprooued quite;
For he that now welds all things at his will,
Scorns th'one and th'other in his deeper skill.

RHYME a b a b b c c

O griefe of griefes, O gall of all good heartes,
To see that vertue should dispised bee
Of him, that first was raisde for vertuous parts,
And now broad spreading like an aged tree,
Lets none shoot vp, that nigh him planted bee:
O let the man, of whom the Muse is scorned,
Nor aliue, nor dead be of the Muse adorned.

RHYME a b a b b c c

O vile worlds trust, that with such vaine illusion
Hath so wise men bewitcht, and ouerkest,
That they see not the way of their confusion;
O vainesse to be added to the rest,
That do my soule with inward griefe infest:
Let them behold the piteous fall of mee,
And in my case their owne ensample see.

RHYME a b a b b c c

And who so els that sits in highest seate
Of this worlds glorie, worshipped of all,
Ne feareth change of time, nor fortunes threate,
Let him behold the horror of my fall,
And his owne end vnto remembrance call;
That of like ruine he may warned bee,
And in himselfe be moou'd to pittie mee.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Thus hauing ended all her piteous plaint,
With dolefull shrikes shee vanished away,
That I through inward sorrowe wexen faint,
And all astonished with deepe dismay,
For her departure, had no word to say:
But sate long time in sencelesse sad affright,
Looking still, if I might of her haue sight.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Which when I missed, hauing looked long,
My thought returned greeued home againe,
Renewing her complaint with passion strong,
For ruth of that same womans piteous paine;
Whose wordes recording in my troubled braine,
I felt such anguish wound my feeble heart,
That frosen horror ran through euerie part.

RHYME a b a b b c c

So inlie greeuing in my groning brest,
And deepelie muzing at her doubtfull speach,
Whose meaning much I labored foorth to wreste,
Being aboue my slender reasons reach;
At length by demonstration me to teach,
Before mine eies strange sights presented were,
Like tragicke Pageants seeming to appeare.

RHYME a b a b b c c

I saw an Image, all of massie gold,
Placed on high vpon an Altare faire,
That all, which did the same from farre beholde,
Might worship it, and fall on lowest staire.
Not that great Idoll might with this compaire,
To which th'Assyrian tyrant would haue made
The holie brethren, falslie to haue praid.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But th'Altare, on the which this Image staid,
Was (O great pitie) built of brickle clay,
That shortly the foundation decaid,
With showres of heauen and tempests worne away:
Then downe it fell, and low in ashes lay,
Scorned of euerie one, which by it went;
That I it seing, dearelie did lament. 2

RHYME a b a b b c c

Next vnto this a statelie Towre appeared,
Built all of richest stone, that might bee found,
And nigh vnto the Heauens in height vpreared,
But placed on a plot of sandie ground:
Not that great Towre, which is so much renownd
For tongues confusion in holie writ,
King Ninus worke might be compar'd to it.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But O vaine labours of terrestriall wit,
That buildes so stronglie on so frayle a soyle,
As with each storme does fall away, and flit,
And giues the fruit of all your trauailes toyle,
To be the pray of Tyme, and Fortunes spoyle:
I saw this Towre fall sodainlie to dust,
That nigh with griefe thereof my heart was brust. 3

RHYME a b a b b c c

Then did I see a pleasant Paradize,
Full of sweete flowres and daintiest delights,
Such as on earth man could not more deuize,
With pleasures choyce to feed his cheerefull sprights;
Not that, which Merlin by his Magicke slights
Made for the gentle squire, to entertaine
His fayre Belph≈ìbe, could this gardine staine.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But O short pleasure bought with lasting paine,
Why will hereafter anie flesh delight
In earthlie blis, and ioy in pleasures vaine,
Since that I sawe this gardine wasted quite,
That where it was scarce seemed anie sight?
That I, which once that beautie did beholde,
Could not from teares my melting eyes with-holde. 4

RHYME a b a b b c c

Soone after this a Giaunt came in place,
Of wondrous power, and of exceeding stature,
That none durst vewe the horror of his face,
Yet was he milde of speach, and meeke of nature.
Not he, which in despight of his Creatour
With railing tearmes defied the Iewish hoast,
Might with this mightie one in hugenes boast.

RHYME a b a b b c c

For from the one he could to th'other coast,
Stretch his strong thighes, and th'Ocean ouerstride,
And reatch his hand into his enemies hoast.
But see the end of pompe and fleshlie pride;
One of his feete vnwares from him did slide,
That downe hee fell into the deepe Abisse,
Where drownd with him is all his earthlie blisse. 5

RHYME a b a b b c c

Then did I see a Bridge, made all of golde,
Ouer the Sea from one to other side,
Withouten prop or pillour it t'vpholde,
But like the coulored Rainbowe arched wide:
Not that great Arche, which Traian edifide,
To be a wonder to all age ensuing,
Was matchable to this in equall vewing.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But (ah) what bootes it to see earthlie thing
In glorie, or in greatnes to excell,
Sith time doth greatest things to ruine bring?
This goodlie bridge, one foote not fastned well,
Gan faile, and all the rest downe shortlie fell,
Ne of so braue a building ought remained,
That griefe thereof my spirite greatly pained.

RHYME a b a b b c c

I saw two Beares, as white as anie milke,
Lying together in a mightie caue,
Of milde aspect, and haire as soft as silke,
That saluage nature seemed not to haue,
Nor after greedie spoyle of blood to craue:
Two fairer beasts might not elswhere be found,
Although the compast world were sought around.

RHYME a b a b b c c

But what can long abide aboue this ground
In state of blis, or stedfast happinesse?
The Caue, in which these Beares lay sleeping sound,
Was but earth, and with her owne weightinesse
Vpon them fell, and did vnwares oppresse,
That for great sorrow of their sudden fate,
Henceforth all worlds felicitie I hate.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Much was I troubled in my heauie spright,
At sight of these sad spectacles forepast,
That all my senses were bereaued quight,
And I in minde remained sore agast,
Distraught twixt feare and pitie; when at last
I heard a voyce, which loudly to me called,
That with the suddein shrill I was appalled.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Behold (said it) and by ensample see,
That all is vanitie and griefe of minde,
Ne other comfort in this world can be,
But hope of heauen, and heart to God inclinde;
For all the rest must needs be left behinde:
With that it bad me, to the other side
To cast mine eye, where other sights I spide.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Vpon that famous Riuers further shore,
There stood a snowie Swan of heauenly hiew,
And gentle kinde, as euer Fowle afore;
A fairer one in all the goodlie criew
Of white Strimonian brood might no man view:
There he most sweetly sung the prophecie
Of his owne death in dolefull Elegie.

RHYME a b a b b c c

At last, when all his mourning melodie
He ended had, that both the shores resounded,
Feeling the fit that him forewarnd to die,
With loftie flight aboue the earth he bounded,
And out of sight to highest heauen mounted:
Where now he is become an heauenly signe;
There now the ioy is his, here sorrow mine. 2

RHYME a b a b b c c

Whilest thus I looked, loe adowne the Lee,
I sawe an Harpe stroong all with siluer twyne,
And made of golde and costlie yuorie,
Swimming, that whilome seemed to haue been
The harpe, on which Dan Orpheus was seene
Wylde beasts and forrests after him to lead,
But was th'Harpe of Philisides now dead.

RHYME a b a b b c c

At length out of the Riuer is was reard
And borne aboue the cloudes to be diuin'd,
Whilst all the way most heauenly noyse was heard
Of the strings, stirred with the warbling wind,
That wrought both ioy and sorrow in my mind:
So now in heauen a signe it doth appeare,
The Harpe well knowne beside the Northern Beare. 3

RHYME a b a b b c c

Soone after this I saw on th'other side,
A curious Coffer made of Heben wood,
That in it did most precious treasure hide,
Exceeding all this baser worldes good:
Yet through the ouerflowing of the flood
It almost drowned was, and done to nought,
That sight thereof much grieu'd my pensiue thought.

RHYME a b a b b c c

At length when most in perill it was brought,
Two Angels downe descending with swift flight,
Out of the swelling streame it lightly caught,
And twixt their blessed armes it carried quight
Aboue the reach of anie liuing sight:
So now it is transform'd into that starre,
In which all heauenly treasures locked are.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Looking aside I saw a stately Bed,
Adorned all with costly cloth of gold,
That might for anie Princes couche be red,
And deckt with daintie flowres, as if it shold
Be for some bride, her ioyous night to hold:
Therein a goodly Virgine sleeping lay;
A fairer wight saw neuer summers day.

RHYME a b a b b c c

I heard a voyce that called farre away
And her awaking bad her quickly dight,
For lo her Bridegrome was in readie ray
To come to her, and seeke her loues delight:
With that she started vp with cherefull sight,
When suddeinly both bed and all was gone,
And I in languor left there all alone. 5

RHYME a b a b b c c

Still as I gazed, I beheld where stood
A Knight all arm'd, vpon a winged steed,
The same that was bred of Medusaes blood,
On which Dan Perseus borne of heauenly seed,
The fair Andromeda from perill freed:
Full mortally this Knight ywounded was,
That streames of blood foorth flowed on the gras.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Yet was he deckt (small ioy to him alas)
With manie garlands for his victories,
And with rich spoyles, which late he did purchas
Through braue atcheiuements from his enemies:
Fainting at last through long infirmities,
He smote his steed, that straight to heauen him bore,
And left me here his losse for to deplore. 6

RHYME a b a b b c c

Lastly I saw an Arke of purest golde
Vpon a brazen pillour standing hie,
Which th'ashes seem'd of some great Prince to hold,
Enclosde therein for endles memorie
Of him, whom all the world did glorifie:
Seemed the heauens with the earth did disagree,
Whether should of those ashes keeper bee.

RHYME a b a b b c c

At last me seem'd wing footed Mercurie,
From heauen descending to appease their strife,
The Arke did beare with him aboue the skie,
And to those ashes gaue a second life,
To liue in heauen, where happines is rife:
At which the earth did grieue exceedingly,
And I for dole was almost like to die.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Immortall spirite of Philisides,
Which now art made the heauens ornament,
That whilome wast the worlds chiefst riches;
Giue leaue to him that lou'de thee to lament
His losse, by lacke of thee to heauen hent,
And with last duties of this broken verse,
Broken with sighes, to decke thy sable Herse.

RHYME a b a b b c c

And ye faire Ladie th'honor of your daies,
And glorie of the world, your high thoughts scorne;
Vouchsafe this moniment of his last praise,
With some few siluer dropping teares t'adorne:
And as ye be of heauenlie off-spring borne,
So vnto heauen let your high minde aspire,
And loath this drosse of sinfull worlds desire.

TITLE Faerie Queene, Book I, I

RHYME a b a b

The Patron of true Holinesse,
Foule Errour doth defeate:
Hypocrisie him to entrappe,
Doth to his home entreate.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Lo I the man, whose Muse whilome did maske,
As time her taught in lowly Shepheards weeds,
Am now enforst a far vnfitter taske,
For trumpets sterne to chaunge mine Oaten reeds,
And sing of Knights and Ladies gentle deeds;
Whose prayses hauing slept in silence long,
Me, all too meane, the sacred Muse areeds
To blazon broad emongst her learned throng:
Fierce warres and faithfull loues shall moralize my song.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Helpe then, O holy Virgin chiefe of nine,
Thy weaker Nouice to performe thy will,
Lay forth out of thine euerlasting scryne
The antique rolles, which there lye hidden still,
Of Faerie knights and fairest Tanaquill,
Whom that most noble Briton Prince so long
Sought through the world, and suffered so much ill,
That I must rue his vndeserued wrong:
O helpe thou my weake wit, and sharpen my dull tong.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And thou most dreaded impe of highest Ioue,
Faire Venus sonne, that with thy cruell dart
At that good knight so cunningly didst roue,
That glorious fire it kindled in his hart,
Lay now thy deadly Heben bow apart,
And with thy mother milde come to mine ayde:
Come both, and with you bring triumphant Mart,
In loues and gentle iollities arrayd,
After his murdrous spoiles and bloudy rage allayd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And with them eke, O Goddesse heauenly bright,
Mirrour of grace and Maiestie diuine,
Great Lady of the greatest Isle, whose light
Like Ph≈ìbus lampe throughout the world doth shine,
Shed thy faire beames into my feeble eyne,
And raise my thoughts too humble and too vile,
To thinke of that true glorious type of thine,
The argument of mine afflicted stile:
The which to heare, vouchsafe, O dearest dred a-while.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A gentle Knight was pricking on the plaine,
Y cladd in mightie armes and siluer shielde,
Wherein old dints of deepe wounds did remaine,
The cruell markes of many' a bloudy fielde;
Yet armes till that time did he neuer wield:
His angry steede did chide his foming bitt,
As much disdayning to the curbe to yield:
Full iolly knight he seemd, and faire did sitt,
As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fitt.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But on his brest a bloudie Crosse he bore,
The deare remembrance of his dying Lord,
For whose sweete sake that glorious badge he wore,
And dead as liuing euer him ador'd:
Vpon his shield the like was also scor'd,
For soueraine hope, which in his helpe he had:
Right faithfull true he was in deede and word,
But of his cheere did seeme too solemne sad;
Yet nothing did he dread, but euer was ydrad.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vpon a great aduenture he was bond,
That greatest Gloriana to him gaue,
That greatest Glorious Queene of Faerie lond,
To winne him worship, and her grace to haue,
Which of all earthly things he most did craue;
And euer as he rode, his hart did earne
To proue his puissance in battell braue
Vpon his foe, and his new force to learne;
Vpon his foe, a Dragon horrible and stearne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A louely Ladie rode him faire beside,
Vpon a lowly Asse more white then snow,
Yet she much whiter, but the same did hide
Vnder a vele, that wimpled was full low,
And ouer all a blacke stole she did throw,
As one that inly mournd: so was she sad,
And heauie sat vpon her palfrey slow;
Seemed in heart some hidden care she had,
And by her in a line a milke white lambe she lad.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So pure an innocent, as that same lambe,
She was in life and euery vertuous lore,
And by descent from Royall lynage came
Of ancient Kings and Queenes, that had of yore
Their scepters stretcht from East to Westerne shore,
And all the world in their subiection held;
Till that infernall feend with foule vprore
Forwasted all their land, and them expeld:
Whom to auenge, she had this Knight from far compeld.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Behind her farre away a Dwarfe did lag,
That lasie seemd in being euer last,
Or wearied with bearing of her bag
Of needments at his backe. Thus as they past,
The day with cloudes was suddeine ouercast,
And angry Ioue an hideous storme of raine
Did poure into his Lemans lap so fast,
That euery wight to shrowd it did constrain,
And this faire couple eke to shroud themselues were fain.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Enforst to seeke some couert nigh at hand,
A shadie groue not far away they spide,
That promist ayde the tempest to withstand:
Whose loftie trees yclad with sommers pride,
Did spred so broad, that heauens light did hide,
Not perceable with power of any starre:
And all within were pathes and alleies wide,
With footing worne, and leading inward farre:
Faire harbour that them seemes; so in they entred arre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And foorth they passe, with pleasure forward led,
Ioying to heare the birdes sweete harmony,
Which therein shrouded from the tempest dred,
Seemd in their song to scorne the cruell sky.
Much can they prayse the trees so straight and hy,
The sayling Pine, the Cedar proud and tall,
The vine-prop Elme, the Poplar neuer dry,
The builder Oake, sole king of forrests all,
The Aspine good for staues, the Cypresse funerall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Laurell, meed of mightie Conquerours
And Poets sage, the Firre that weepeth still,
The Willow worne of forlorne Paramours,
The Eugh obedient to the benders will,
The Birch for shaftes, the Sallow for the mill,
The Mirrhe sweete bleeding in the bitter wound,
The warlike Beech, the Ash for nothing ill,
The fruitfull Oliue, and the Platane round,
The caruer Holme, the Maple seeldom inward sound.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Led with delight, they thus beguile the way,
Vntill the blustring storme is ouerblowne;
When weening to returne, whence they did stray,
They cannot finde that path, which first was showne,
But wander too and fro in wayes vnknowne,
Furthest from end then, when they neerest weene,
That makes them doubt, their wits be not their owne:
So many pathes, so many turnings seene,
That which of them to take, in diuerse doubt they been.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last resoluing forward still to fare,
Till that some end they finde or in or out,
That path they take, that beaten seemd most bare,
And like to lead the labyrinth about;
Which when by tract they hunted had throughout,
At length it brought them to a hollow caue,
Amid the thickest woods. The Champion stout
Eftsoones dismounted from his courser braue,
And to the Dwarfe a while his needlesse spere he gaue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Be well aware, quoth then that Ladie milde,
Least suddaine mischiefe ye too rash prouoke:
The danger hid, the place vnknowne and wilde,
Breedes dreadfull doubts: Oft fire is without smoke,
And perill without show: therefore your stroke
Sir knight with-hold, till further triall made.
Ah Ladie (said he) shame were to reuoke
The forward footing for an hidden shade:
Vertue giues her selfe light, through darkenesse for to wade.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Yea but (quoth she) the perill of this place
I better wot then you, though now too late
To wish you backe returne with foule disgrace,
Yet wisedome warnes, whilest foot is in the gate,
To stay the steppe, ere forced to retrate.
This is the wandring wood, this Errours den,
A monster vile, whom God and man does hate:
Therefore I read beware. Fly fly (quoth then
The fearefull Dwarfe:) this is no place for liuing men.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But full of fire and greedy hardiment;
The youthfull knight could not for ought be staide,
But forth vnto the darksome hole he went,
And looked in: his glistring armor made
A litle glooming light, much like a shade,
By which he saw the vgly monster plaine,
Halfe like a serpent horribly displaide,
But th'other halfe did womans shape retaine,
Most lothsom, filthie, foule, and full of vile disdaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And as she lay vpon the durtie ground,
Her huge long taile her den all ouerspred,
Yet was in knots and many boughtes vpwound,
Pointed with mortall sting. Of her there bred
A thousand yong ones, which she dayly fed,
Sucking vpon her poisonous dugs, eachone
Of sundry shapes, yet all ill fauored:
Soone as that vncouth light vpon them shone,
Into her mouth they crept, and suddain all were gone.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Their dam vpstart, out of her den effraide,
And rushed forth, hurling her hideous taile
About her cursed head, whose folds displaid
Were stretcht now forth at length without entraile.
She lookt about, and seeing one in mayle
Armed to point, sought backe to turne againe;
For light she hated as the deadly bale,
Ay wont in desert darknesse to remaine,
Where plaine none might her see, nor she see any plaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which when the valiant Elfe perceiu'd, he lept
As Lyon fierce vpon the flying pray,
And with his trenchand blade her boldly kept
From turning backe, and forced her to stay:
Therewith enrag'd she loudly gan to bray,
And turning fierce, her speckled taile aduaunst,
Threatning her angry sting, him to dismay:
Who nought aghast, his mightie hand enhaunst:
The stroke down from her head vnto her shoulder glaunst.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Much daunted with that dint, her sence was dazd,
Yet kindling rage, her selfe she gathered round,
And all attonce her beastly body raizd
With doubled forces high aboue the ground:
Tho wrapping vp her wrethed sterne arownd,
Lept fierce vpon his shield, and her huge traine
All suddenly about his body wound,
That hand or foot to stirre he stroue in vaine:
God helpe the man so wrapt in Errours endlesse traine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His Lady sad to see his sore constraint,
Cride out, Now now Sir knight, shew what ye bee,
Add faith vnto your force, and be not faint:
Strangle her, else she sure will strangle thee.
That when he heard, in great perplexitie,
His gall did grate for griefe and high disdaine,
And knitting all his force got one hand free,
Wherewith he grypt her gorge with so great paine,
That soone to loose her wicked bands did her constraine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith she spewd out of her filthy maw
A floud of poyson horrible and blacke,
Full of great lumpes of flesh and gobbets raw,
Which stunck so vildly, that it forst him slacke
His grasping hold, and from her turne him backe:
Her vomit full of bookes and papers was,
With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke,
And creeping sought way in the weedy gras:
Her filthy parbreake all the place defiled has.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

As when old father Nilus gins to swell
With timely pride aboue the Aegyptian vale,
His fattie waues do fertile slime outwell,
And ouerflow each plaine and lowly dale:
But when his later spring gins to auale,
Huge heapes of mudd he leaues, wherein there breed
Ten thousand kindes of creatures, partly male
And partly female of his fruitfull seed;
Such vgly monstrous shapes elswhere may no man reed.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The same so sore annoyed has the knight,
That welnigh choked with the deadly stinke,
His forces faile, ne can no longer fight.
Whose corage when the feend perceiu'd to shrinke,
She poured forth out of her hellish sinke
Her fruitfull cursed spawne of serpents small,
Deformed monsters, fowle, and blacke as inke,
Which swarming all about his legs did crall,
And him encombred sore, but could not hurt at all.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

As gentle Shepheard in sweete euen-tide,
When ruddy Ph≈ìbus gins to welke in west,
High on an hill, his flocke to vewen wide,
Markes which do byte their hasty supper best;
A cloud of combrous gnattes do him molest,
All striuing to infixe their feeble stings,
That from their noyance he no where can rest,
But with his clownish hands their tender wings
He brusheth oft, and oft doth mar their murmurings.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thus ill bestedd, and fearefull more of shame,
Then of the certaine perill he stood in,
Halfe furious vnto his foe he came,
Resolv'd in minde all suddenly to win,
Or soone to lose, before he once would lin;
And strooke at her with more then manly force,
That from her body full of filthie sin
He raft her hatefull head without remorse;
A streame of cole black bloud forth gushed from her corse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her scattred brood, soone as their Parent deare
They saw so rudely falling to the ground,
Groning full deadly, all with troublous feare,
Gathred themselues about her body round,
Weening their wonted entrance to haue found
At her wide mouth: but being there withstood
They flocked all about her bleeding wound,
And sucked vp their dying mothers blood,
Making her death their life, and eke her hurt their good.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

That detestable sight him much amazde,
To see th'vnkindly Impes of heauen accurst,
Deuoure their dam; on whom while so he gazd,
Hauing all satisfide their bloudy thurst,
Their bellies swolne he saw with fulnesse burst,
And bowels gushing forth: well worthy end
Of such as drunke her life, the which them nurst;
Now needeth him no lenger labour spend,
His foes haue slaine themselues, with whom he should contend.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His Ladie seeing all, that chaunst, from farre
Approcht in hast to greet his victorie,
And said, Faire knight, borne vnder happy starre,
Who see your vanquisht foes before you lye:
Well worthy be you of that Armorie,
Wherein ye haue great glory wonne this day,
And proou'd your strength on a strong enimie,
Your first aduenture: many such I pray,
And henceforth euer wish, that like succeed it may.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then mounted he vpon his Steede againe,
And with the Lady backward sought to wend;
That path he kept, which beaten was most plaine,
Ne euer would to any by-way bend,
But still did follow one vnto the end,
The which at last out of the wood them brought.
So forward on his way (with God to frend)
He passed forth, and new aduenture sought;
Long way he trauelled, before he heard of ought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At length they chaunst to meet vpon the way
An aged Sire, in long blacke weedes yclad,
His feete all bare, his beard all hoarie gray,
And by his belt his booke he hanging had;
Sober he seemde, and very sagely sad,
And to the ground his eyes were lowly bent,
Simple in shew, and voyde of malice bad,
And all the way he prayed, as he went,
And often knockt his brest, as one that did repent.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He faire the knight saluted, louting low,
Who faire him quited, as that courteous was:
And after asked him, if he did know
Of straunge aduentures, which abroad did pas.
Ah my deare Sonne (quoth he) how should, alas,
Silly old man, that liues in hidden cell,
Bidding his beades all day for his trespas,
Tydings of warre and worldly trouble tell?
With holy father sits not with such things to mell.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But if of daunger which hereby doth dwell,
And homebred euill ye desire to heare,
Of a straunge man I can you tidings tell,
That wasteth all this countrey farre and neare.
Of such (said he) I chiefly do inquere,
And shall you well reward to shew the place,
In which that wicked wight his dayes doth weare:
For to all knighthood it is foule disgrace,
That such a cursed creature liues so long a space.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Far hence (quoth he) in wastfull wildernesse
His dwelling is, by which no liuing wight
May euer passe, but thorough great distresse.
Now (sayd the Lady) draweth toward night,
And well I wote, that of your later fight
Ye all forwearied be: for what so strong,
But wanting rest will also want of might?
The Sunne that measures heauen all day long,
At night doth baite his steedes the Ocean waues emong.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then with the Sunne take Sir, your timely rest,
And with new day new worke at once begin:
Vntroubled night they say giues counsell best.
Right well Sir knight ye haue aduised bin,
(Quoth then that aged man;) the way to win
Is wisely to aduise: now day is spent;
Therefore with me ye may take vp your In
For this same night. The knight was well content:
So with that godly father to his home they went.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A little lowly Hermitage it was,
Downe in a dale, hard by a forests side,
Far from resort of people, that did pas
In trauell to and froe: a little wyde
There was an holy Chappell edifyde,
Wherein the Hermite dewly wont to say
His holy things each morne and euentyde:
Thereby a Christall streame did gently play,
Which from a sacred fountaine welled forth alway.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Arriued there, the little house they fill,
Ne looke for entertainement, where none was:
Rest is their feast, and all things at their will;
The noblest mind the best contentment has.
With faire discourse the euening so they pas:
For that old man of pleasing wordes had store,
And well could file his tongue as smooth as glas;
He told of Saintes and Popes, and euermore
He strowd an Aue-Mary after and before.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The drouping Night thus creepeth on them fast,
And the sad humour loading their eye liddes,
As messenger of Morpheus on them cast
Sweet slombring deaw, the which to sleepe them biddes.
Vnto their lodgings then his guestes he riddes:
Where when all drownd in deadly sleepe he findes,
He to his study goes, and there amiddes
His Magick bookes and artes of sundry kindes,
He seekes out mighty charmes, to trouble sleepy mindes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then choosing out few wordes most horrible,
(Let none them read) thereof did verses frame,
With which and other spelles like terrible,
He bad awake blacke Plutoes griesly Dame,
And cursed heauen, and spake reprochfull shame
Of highest God, the Lord of life and light;
A bold bad man, that dar'd to call by name
Great Gorgon, Prince of darknesse and dead night,
At which Cocytus quakes, and Styx is put to flight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And forth he cald out of deepe darknesse dred
Legions of Sprights, the which like little flyes
Fluttring about his euer damned hed,
A-waite whereto their seruice he applyes,
To aide his friends, or fray his enimies:
Of those he chose out two, the falsest twoo,
And fittest for to forge true-seeming lyes;
The one of them he gaue a message too,
The other by him selfe staide other worke to doo.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He making speedy way through spersed ayre,
And through the world of waters wide and deepe,
To Morpheus house doth hastily repaire.
Amid the bowels of the earth full steepe,
And low, where dawning day doth neuer peepe,
His dwelling is; there Tethys his wet bed
Doth euer wash, and Cynthia still doth steepe
In siluer deaw his euer-drouping hed,
Whiles sad Night ouer him her mantle black doth spred.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whose double gates he findeth locked fast,
The one faire fram'd of burnisht Yuory,
The other all with siluer ouercast;
And wakefull dogges before them farre do lye,
Watching to banish Care their enimy,
Who oft is wont to trouble gentle Sleepe.
By them the Sprite doth passe in quietly,
And vnto Morpheus comes, whom drowned deepe
In drowsie fit he findes: of nothing he takes keepe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And more, to lulle him in his slumber soft,
A trickling streame from high rocke tumbling downe
And euer-drizling raine vpon the loft,
Mixt with a murmuring winde, much like the sowne
Of swarming Bees, did cast him in a swowne:
No other noyse, nor peoples troublous cryes,
As still are wont t'annoy the walled towne,
Might there be heard: but carelesse Quiet lyes,
Wrapt in eternall silence farre from enemyes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The messenger approching to him spake,
But his wast wordes returnd to him in vaine:
So sound he slept, that nought mought him awake.
Then rudely he him thrust, and pusht with paine,
Whereat he gan to stretch: but he againe
Shooke him so hard, that forced him to speake.
As one then in a dreame, whose dryer braine
Is tost with troubled sights and fancies weake,
He mumbled soft, but would not all his silence breake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Sprite then gan more boldly him to wake,
And threatned vnto him the dreaded name
Of Hecate: whereat he gan to quake,
And lifting vp his lumpish head, with blame
Halfe angry asked him, for what he came.
Hither (quoth he) me Archimago sent,
He that the stubborne Sprites can wisely tame,
He bids thee to him send for his intent
A fit false dreame, that can delude the sleepers sent.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The God obayde, and calling forth straight way
A diuerse dreame out of his prison darke,
Deliuered it to him, and downe did lay
His heauie head, deuoide of carefull carke,
Whose sences all were straight benumbd and starke.
He backe returning by the Yuorie dore,
Remounted vp as light as chearefull Larke,
And on his litle winges the dreame he bore
In hast vnto his Lord, where he him left afore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who all this while with charmes and hidden artes,
Had made a Lady of that other Spright,
And fram'd of liquid ayre her tender partes
So liuely, and so like in all mens sight,
That weaker sence it could haue rauisht quight:
The maker selfe for all his wondrous witt,
Was nigh beguiled with so goodly sight:
Her all in white he clad, and ouer it
Cast a blacke stole, most like to seeme for Vna fit.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now when that ydle dreame was to him brought,
Vnto that Elfin knight he bad him fly,
Where he slept soundly void of euill thought,
And with false shewes abuse his fantasy,
In sort as he him schooled priuily:
And that new creature borne without her dew,
Full of the makers guile, with vsage sly
He taught to imitate that Lady trew,
Whose semblance she did carrie vnder feigned hew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thus well instructed, to their worke they hast,
And comming where the knight in slomber lay,
The one vpon his hardy head him plast,
And made him dreame of loues and lustfull play,
That nigh his manly hart did melt away,
Bathed in wanton blis and wicked ioy:
Then seemed him his Lady by him lay,
And to him playnd, how that false winged boy,
Her chast hart had subdewd, to learne Dame pleasures toy.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And she her selfe of beautie soueraigne Queene,
Faire Venus seemde vnto his bed to bring
Her, whom he waking euermore did weene,
To be the chastest flowre, that ay did spring
On earthly braunch, the daughter of a king,
Now a loose Leman to vile seruice bound:
And eke the Graces seemed all to sing,
Hymen to Hymen, dauncing all around,
Whilst freshest Flora her with Yuie girlond crownd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In this great passion of vnwonted lust,
Or wonted feare of doing ought amis,
He started vp, as seeming to mistrust
Some secret ill, or hidden foe of his:
Lo there before his face his Lady is,
Vnder blake stole hyding her bayted hooke,
And as halfe blushing offred him to kis,
With gentle blandishment and louely looke,
Most like that virgin true, which for her knight him took.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

All cleane dismayd to see so vncouth sight,
And halfe enraged at her shamelesse guise,
He thought haue slaine her in his fierce despight:
But hasty heat tempring with sufferance wise,
He stayde his hand, and gan himselfe aduise
To proue his sense, and tempt her faigned truth.
Wringing her hands in wemens pitteous wise,
Tho can she weepe, to stirre vp gentle ruth,
Both for her noble bloud, and for her tender youth.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And said, Ah Sir, my liege Lord and my loue,
Shall I accuse the hidden cruell fate,
And mightie causes wrought in heauen aboue,
Or the blind God, that doth me thus amate,
For hoped loue to winne me certaine hate?
Yet thus perforce he bids me do, or die.
Die is my dew: yet rew my wretched state
You, whom my hard auenging destinie
Hath made iudge of my life or death indifferently.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Your owne deare sake forst me at first to leaue
My Fathers kingdome, There she stopt with teares;
Her swollen hart her speach seemd to bereaue,
And then againe begun, My weaker yeares
Captiu'd to fortune and frayle worldly feares,
Fly to your faith for succour and sure ayde:
Let me not dye in languor and long teares.
Why Dame (quoth he) what hath ye thus dismayd?
What frayes ye, that were wont to comfort me affrayd?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Loue of your selfe, she said, and deare constraint
Lets me not sleepe, but wast the wearie night
In secret anguish and vnpittied plaint,
Whiles you in carelesse sleepe are drowned quight.
Her doubtfull words made that redoubted knight
Suspect her truth: yet since no'vntruth he knew,
Her fawning loue with foule disdainefull spight
He would not shend, but said, Deare dame I rew,
That for my sake vnknowne such griefe vnto you grew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Assure your selfe, it fell not all to ground;
For all so deare as life is to my hart,
I deeme your loue, and hold me to you bound;
Ne let vaine feares procure your needlesse smart,
Where cause is none, but to your rest depart.
Not all content, yet seemd she to appease
Her mournefull plaintes, beguiled of her art,
And fed with words, that could not chuse but please,
So slyding softly forth, she turnd as to her ease.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Long after lay he musing at her mood,
Much grieu'd to thinke that gentle Dame so light,
For whose defence he was to shed his blood.
At last dull wearinesse of former fight
Hauing yrockt a sleepe his irkesome spright,
That troublous dreame gan freshly tosse his braine,
With bowres, and beds, and Ladies deare delight:
But when he saw his labour all was vaine,
With that misformed spright he backe returnd againe. 

TITLE Faerie Queene, II

RHYME a b a b

The guilefull great Enchaunter parts
The Redcrosse Knight from Truth:
Into whose stead faire falshood steps,
And workes him wofull ruth.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

BY this the Northerne wagoner had set
    His seuenfold teme behind the stedfast starre,
    That was in Ocean waues yet neuer wet,
    But firme is fixt, and sendeth light from farre
    To all, that in the wide deepe wandring arre:
    And chearefull Chaunticlere with his note shrill
    Had warned once, that Phoebus fiery carre
    In hast was climbing vp the Easterne hill,
Full enuious that night so long his roome did fill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

When those accursed messengers of hell,
    That feigning dreame, and that faire-forged Spright
    Came to their wicked maister, and gan tell
    Their bootelesse paines, and ill succeeding night:
    Who all in rage to see his skilfull might
    Deluded so, gan threaten hellish paine
    And sad Proserpines wrath, them to affright.
    But when he saw his threatning was but vaine,
He cast about, and searcht his balefull bookes againe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Eftsoones he tooke that miscreated faire,
    And that false other Spright, on whom he spred
    A seeming body of the subtile aire,
    Like a young Squire, in loues and lusty-hed
    His wanton dayes that euer loosely led,
    Without regard of armes and dreaded fight:
    Those two he tooke, and in a secret bed,
    Couered with darknesse and misdeeming night,
Them both together laid, to ioy in vaine delight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Forthwith he runnes with feigned faithfull hast
    Vnto his guest, who after troublous sights
    And dreames, gan now to take more sound repast,
    Whom suddenly he wakes with fearefull frights,
    As one aghast with feends or damned sprights,
    And to him cals, Rise rise vnhappy Swaine,
    That here wex old in sleepe, whiles wicked wights
    Haue knit themselues in Venus shamefull chaine;
Come see, where your false Lady doth her honour staine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

All in amaze he suddenly vp start
    With sword in hand, and with the old man went;
    Who soone him brought into a secret part,
    Where that false couple were full closely ment
    In wanton lust and lewd embracement:
    Which when he saw, he burnt with gealous fire,
    The eye of reason was with rage yblent,
    And would haue slaine them in his furious ire,
But hardly was restreined of that aged sire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Returning to his bed in torment great,
    And bitter anguish of his guiltie sight,
    He could not rest, but did his stout heart eat,
    And wast his inward gall with deepe despight,
    Yrkesome of life, and too long lingring night.
    At last faire Hesperus in highest skie
    Had spent his lampe, and brought forth dawning light,
    Then vp he rose, and clad him hastily;
The Dwarfe him brought his steed: so both away do fly.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now when the rosy-fingred Morning faire,
    Weary of aged Tithones saffron bed,
    Had spred her purple robe through deawy aire,
    And the high hils Titan discouered,
    The royall virgin shooke off drowsy-hed,
    And rising forth out of her baser bowre,
    Lookt for her knight, who far away was fled,
    And for her Dwarfe, that wont to wait each houre;
Then gan she waile and weepe, to see that woefull stowre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And after him she rode with so much speede
    As her slow beast could make; but all in vaine:
    For him so far had borne his light-foot steede,
    Pricked with wrath and fiery fierce disdaine,
    That him to follow was but fruitlesse paine;
    Yet she her weary limbes would neuer rest,
    But euery hill and dale, each wood and plaine
    Did search, sore grieued in her gentle brest,
He so vngently left her, whom she loued best.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But subtill Archimago, when his guests
    He saw diuided into double parts,
    And Vna wandring in woods and forrests,
    Th'end of his drift, he praisd his diuelish arts,
    That had such might ouer true meaning harts;
    Yet rests not so, but other meanes doth make,
    How he may worke vnto her further smarts:
    For her he hated as the hissing snake,
And in her many troubles did most pleasure take.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He then deuisde himselfe how to disguise;
    For by his mightie science he could take
    As many formes and shapes in seeming wise,
    As euer Proteus to himselfe could make:
    Sometime a fowle, sometime a fish in lake,
    Now like a foxe, now like a dragon fell,
    That of himselfe he oft for feare would quake,
    And oft would flie away. O who can tell
The hidden power of herbes, and might of Magicke spell?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But now seemde best, the person to put on
    Of that good knight, his late beguiled guest:
    In mighty armes he was yclad anon,
    And siluer shield vpon his coward brest
    A bloudy crosse, and on his crauen crest
    A bounch of haires discolourd diuersly:
    Full iolly knight he seemde, and well addrest,
    And when he sate vpon his courser free,
Saint George himself ye would haue deemed him to be.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But he the knight, whose semblaunt he did beare,
    The true Saint George was wandred far away,
    Still flying from his thoughts and gealous feare;
    Will was his guide, and griefe led him astray.
    At last him chaunst to meete vpon the way
    A faithlesse Sarazin all arm'd to point,
    In whose great shield was writ with letters gay
    Sans foy: full large of limbe and euery ioint
He was, and cared not for God or man a point.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He had a faire companion of his way,
    A goodly Lady clad in scarlot red,
    Purfled with gold and pearle of rich assay,
    And like a Persian mitre on her hed
    She wore, with crownes and owches garnished,
    The which her lauish louers to her gaue;
    Her wanton palfrey all was ouerspred
    With tinsell trappings, wouen like a waue,
Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses braue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

With faire disport and courting dalliaunce
    She intertainde her louer all the way:
    But when she saw the knight his speare aduaunce,
    She soone left off her mirth and wanton play,
    And bad her knight addresse him to the fray:
    His foe was nigh at hand. He prickt with pride
    And hope to winne his Ladies heart that day,
    Forth spurred fast: adowne his coursers side
The red bloud trickling staind the way, as he did ride.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight of the Redcrosse when him he spide,
    Spurring so hote with rage dispiteous,
    Gan fairely couch his speare, and towards ride:
    Soone meete they both, both fell and furious,
    That daunted with their forces hideous,
    Their steeds do stagger, and amazed stand,
    And eke themselues too rudely rigorous,
    Astonied with the stroke of their owne hand,
Do backe rebut, and each to other yeeldeth land.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

As when two rams stird with ambitious pride,
    Fight for the rule of the rich fleeced flocke,
    Their horned fronts so fierce on either side
    Do meete, that with the terrour of the shocke
    Astonied both, stand sencelesse as a blocke,
    Forgetfull of the hanging victory:
    So stood these twaine, vnmoued as a rocke,
    Both staring fierce, and holding idely
The broken reliques of their former cruelty.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Sarazin sore daunted with the buffe
    Snatcheth his sword, and fiercely to him flies;
    Who well it wards, and quyteth cuff with cuff:
    Each others equall puissaunce enuies,
    And through their iron sides with cruell spies
    Does seeke to perce: repining courage yields
    No foote to foe. The flashing fier flies
    As from a forge out of their burning shields,
And streames of purple bloud new dies the verdant fields.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Curse on that Crosse (quoth then the Sarazin)
    That keepes thy body from the bitter fit;
    Dead long ygoe I wote thou haddest bin,
    Had not that charme from thee forwarned it:
    But yet I warne thee now assured sitt,
    And hide thy head. Therewith vpon his crest
    With rigour so outrageous he smitt,
    That a large share it hewd out of the rest,
And glauncing downe his shield, from blame him fairely blest.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who thereat wondrous wroth, the sleeping spark
    Of natiue vertue gan eftsoones reuiue,
    And at his haughtie helmet making mark,
    So hugely stroke, that it the steele did riue,
    And cleft his head. He tumbling downe aliue,
    With bloudy mouth his mother earth did kis,
    Greeting his graue: his grudging ghost did striue
    With the fraile flesh; at last it flitted is,
Whither the soules do fly of men, that liue amis.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Lady when she saw her champion fall,
    Like the old ruines of a broken towre,
    Staid not to waile his woefull funerall,
    But from him fled away with all her powre;
    Who after her as hastily gan scowre,
    Bidding the Dwarfe with him to bring away
    The Sarazins shield, signe of the conqueroure.
    Her soone he ouertooke, and bad to stay,
For present cause was none of dread her to dismay.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She turning backe with ruefull countenaunce,
    Cride, Mercy mercy Sir vouchsafe to show
    On silly Dame, subiect to hard mischaunce,
    And to your mighty will. Her humblesse low
    In so ritch weedes and seeming glorious show,
    Did much emmoue his stout hero¨icke heart,
    And said, Deare dame, your suddein ouerthrow
    Much rueth me; but now put feare apart,
And tell, both who ye be, and who that tooke your part.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Melting in teares, then gan she thus lament;
    The wretched woman, whom vnhappy howre
    Hath now made thrall to your commandement,
    Before that angry heauens list to lowre,
    And fortune false betraide me to your powre,
    Was, (O what now auaileth that I was!)
    Borne the sole daughter of an Emperour,
    He that the wide West vnder his rule has,
And high hath set his throne, where Tiberis doth pas.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He in the first flowre of my freshest age,
    Betrothed me vnto the onely haire
    Of a most mighty king, most rich and sage;
    Was neuer Prince so faithfull and so faire,
    Was neuer Prince so meeke and debonaire;
    But ere my hoped day of spousall shone,
    My dearest Lord fell from high honours staire,
    Into the hands of his accursed fone,
And cruelly was slaine, that shall I euer mone.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His blessed body spoild of liuely breath,
    Was afterward, I know not how, conuaid
    And fro me hid: of whose most innocent death
    When tidings came to me vnhappy maid,
    O how great sorrow my sad soule assaid.
    Then forth I went his woefull corse to find,
    And many yeares throughout the world I straid,
    A virgin widow, whose deepe wounded mind
With loue, long time did languish as the striken hind.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last it chaunced this proud Sarazin
    To meete me wandring, who perforce me led
    With him away, but yet could neuer win
    The Fort, that Ladies hold in soueraigne dread.
    There lies he now with foule dishonour dead,
    Who whiles he liu'de, was called proud Sans foy,
    The eldest of three brethren, all three bred
    Of one bad sire, whose youngest is Sans ioy,
And twixt them both was borne the bloudy bold Sans loy.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In this sad plight, friendlesse, vnfortunate,
    Now miserable I Fidessa dwell,
    Crauing of you in pitty of my state,
    To do none ill, if please ye not do well.
    He in great passion all this while did dwell,
    More busying his quicke eyes, her face to view,
    Then his dull eares, to heare what she did tell;
    And said, Faire Lady hart of flint would rew
The vndeserued woes and sorrowes, which ye shew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Henceforth in safe assuraunce may ye rest,
    Hauing both found a new friend you to aid,
    And lost an old foe, that did you molest:
    Better new friend then an old foe is said.
    With chaunge of cheare the seeming simple maid
    Let fall her eyen, as shamefast to the earth,
    And yeelding soft, in that she nought gain-said,
    So forth they rode, he feining seemely merth,
And she coy lookes: so dainty they say maketh derth.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Long time they thus together traueiled,
    Till weary of their way, they came at last,
    Where grew two goodly trees, that faire did spred
    Their armes abroad, with gray mosse ouercast,
    And their greene leaues trembling with euery blast,
    Made a calme shadow far in compasse round:
    The fearefull Shepheard often there aghast
    Vnder them neuer sat, ne wont there sound
His mery oaten pipe, but shund th'vnlucky ground.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But this good knight soone as he them can spie,
    For the coole shade him thither hastly got:
    For golden Phoebus now ymounted hie,
    From fiery wheeles of his faire chariot
    Hurled his beame so scorching cruell hot,
    That liuing creature mote it not abide;
    And his new Lady it endured not.
    There they alight, in hope themselues to hide
From the fierce heat, and rest their weary limbs a tide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Faire seemely pleasaunce each to other makes,
    With goodly purposes there as they sit:
    And in his falsed fancy he her takes
    To be the fairest wight, that liued yit;
    Which to expresse, he bends his gentle wit,
    And thinking of those braunches greene to frame
    A girlond for her dainty forehead fit,
    He pluckt a bough; out of whose rift there came
Small drops of gory bloud, that trickled downe the same.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith a piteous yelling voyce was heard,
    Crying, O spare with guilty hands to teare
    My tender sides in this rough rynd embard,
    But fly, ah fly far hence away, for feare
    Least to you hap, that happened to me heare,
    And to this wretched Lady, my deare loue,
    O too deare loue, loue bought with death too deare.
    Astond he stood, and vp his haire did houe,
And with that suddein horror could no member moue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last whenas the dreadfull passion
    Was ouerpast, and manhood well awake,
    Yet musing at the straunge occasion,
    And doubting much his sence, he thus bespake;
    What voyce of damned Ghost from Limbo lake,
    Or guilefull spright wandring in empty aire,
    Both which fraile men do oftentimes mistake,
    Sends to my doubtfull eares these speaches rare,
And ruefull plaints, me bidding guiltlesse bloud to spare?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then groning deepe, Nor damned Ghost, (quoth he,)
    Nor guilefull sprite, to thee these wordes doth speake,
    But once a man Fradubio, now a tree,
    Wretched man, wretched tree; whose nature weake,
    A cruell witch her cursed will to wreake,
    Hath thus transformd, and plast in open plaines,
    Where Boreas doth blow full bitter bleake,
    And scorching Sunne does dry my secret vaines:
For though a tree I seeme, yet cold and heat me paines.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Say on Fradubio then, or man, or tree,
    Quoth then the knight, by whose mischieuous arts
    Art thou misshaped thus, as now I see?
    He oft finds med'cine, who his griefe imparts;
    But double griefs afflict concealing harts,
    As raging flames who striueth to suppresse.
    The author then (said he) of all my smarts,
    Is one Duessa a false sorceresse,
That many errãt knights hath brought to wretchednesse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In prime of youthly yeares, when corage hot
    The fire of loue and ioy of cheualree
    First kindled in my brest, it was my lot
    To loue this gentle Lady, whom ye see,
    Now not a Lady, but a seeming tree;
    With whom as once I rode accompanyde,
    Me chaunced of a knight encountred bee,
    That had a like faire Lady by his syde,
Like a faire Lady, but did fowle Duessa hyde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whose forged beauty he did take in hand,
    All other Dames to haue exceeded farre;
    I in defence of mine did likewise stand,
    Mine, that did then shine as the Morning starre:
    So both to battell fierce arraunged arre,
    In which his harder fortune was to fall
    Vnder my speare: such is the dye of warre:
    His Lady left as a prise martiall,
Did yield her comely person, to be at my call.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So doubly lou'd of Ladies vnlike faire,
    Th'one seeming such, the other such indeede,
    One day in doubt I cast for to compare,
    Whether in beauties glorie did exceede;
    A Rosy girlond was the victors meede:
    Both seemde to win, and both seemde won to bee,
    So hard the discord was to be agreede.
    Frælissa was as faire, as faire mote bee,
And euer false Duessa seemde as faire as shee.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The wicked witch now seeing all this while
    The doubtfull ballaunce equally to sway,
    What not by right, she cast to win by guile,
    And by her hellish science raisd streightway
    A foggy mist, that ouercast the day,
    And a dull blast, that breathing on her face,
    Dimmed her former beauties shining ray,
    And with foule vgly forme did her disgrace:
Then was she faire alone, when none was faire in place.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then cride she out, Fye, fye, deformed wight,
    Whose borrowed beautie now appeareth plaine
    To haue before bewitched all mens sight;
    O leaue her soone, or let her soone be slaine.
    Her loathly visage viewing with disdaine,
    Eftsoones I thought her such, as she me told,
    And would haue kild her; but with faigned paine,
    The false witch did my wrathfull hand with-hold;
So left her, where she now is turnd to treen mould.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thensforth I tooke Duessa for my Dame,
    And in the witch vnweeting ioyd long time,
    Ne euer wist, but that she was the same,
    Till on a day (that day is euery Prime,
    When Witches wont do penance for their crime)
    I chaunst to see her in her proper hew,
    Bathing her selfe in origane and thyme:
    A filthy foule old woman I did vew,
That euer to haue toucht her, I did deadly rew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her neather partes misshapen, monstruous,
    Were hidd in water, that I could not see,
    But they did seeme more foule and hideous,
    Then womans shape man would beleeue to bee.
    Thensforth from her most beastly companie
    I gan refraine, in minde to slip away,
    Soone as appeard safe opportunitie:
    For danger great, if not assur'd decay
I saw before mine eyes, if I were knowne to stray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The diuelish hag by chaunges of my cheare
    Perceiu'd my thought, and drownd in sleepie night,
    With wicked herbes and ointments did besmeare
    My bodie all, through charmes and magicke might,
    That all my senses were bereaued quight:
    Then brought she me into this desert waste,
    And by my wretched louers side me pight,
    Where now enclosd in wooden wals full faste,
Banisht from liuing wights, our wearie dayes we waste.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But how long time, said then the Elfin knight,
    Are you in this misformed house to dwell?
    We may not chaunge (quoth he) this euil plight,
    Till we be bathed in a liuing well;
    That is the terme prescribed by the spell.
    O how, said he, mote I that well out find,
    That may restore you to your wonted well?
    Time and suffised fates to former kynd
Shall vs restore, none else from hence may vs vnbynd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The false Duessa, now Fidessa hight,
    Heard how in vaine Fradubio did lament,
    And knew well all was true. But the good knight
    Full of sad feare and ghastly dreriment,
    When all this speech the liuing tree had spent,
    The bleeding bough did thrust into the ground,
    That from the bloud he might be innocent,
    And with fresh clay did close the wooden wound:
Then turning to his Lady, dead with feare her found.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her seeming dead he found with feigned feare,
    As all vnweeting of that well she knew,
    And paynd himselfe with busie care to reare
    Her out of carelesse swowne. Her eylids blew
    And dimmed sight with pale and deadly hew
    At last she vp gan lift: with trembling cheare
    Her vp he tooke, too simple and too trew,
And oft her kist. At length all passed feare,
He set her on her steede, and forward forth did beare.

TITLE Faerie Queene, III

RHYME a b a b

Forsaken Truth long seekes her loue,
And makes the Lyon mylde,
Marres blind Deuotions mart, and fals
In hand of leachour vylde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

NOught there vnder heau'ns wilde hollownesse,
   That moues more deare compassion of mind,
   Then beautie brought t'vnworthy wretchednesse
   Through enuies snares or fortunes freakes vnkind:
   I, whether lately through her brightnesse blind,
   Or through alleageance and fast fealtie,
   Which I do owe vnto all woman kind,
   Feele my heart perst with so great agonie,
When such I see, that all for pittie I could die.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And now it is empassioned so deepe,
   For fairest Vnaes sake, of whom I sing,
  That my fraile eyes these lines with teares do steepe,
To thinke how she through guilefull handeling,
   Though true as touch, though daughter of a king,
   Though faire as euer liuing wight was faire,
   Though nor in word nor deede ill meriting,
   Is from her knight diuorced in despaire
And her due loues deriu'd to that vile witches share.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Yet she most faithfull Ladie all this while
   Forsaken, wofull, solitarie mayd
   Farre from all peoples prease, as in exile,
   In wildernesse and wastfull deserts strayd,
   To seeke her knight; who subtilly betrayd
   Through that late vision, which th'Enchaunter wrought,
   Had her abandond. She of nought affrayd,
   Through woods and wastnesse wide him daily sought;
Yet wished tydings none of him vnto her brought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

One day nigh wearie of the yrkesome way,
   From her vnhastie beast she did alight,
   And on the grasse her daintie limbes did lay
   In secret shadow, farre from all mens sight:
   From her faire head her fillet she vndight,
   And laid her stole aside. Her angels face
   As the great eye of heauen shyned bright,
   And made a sunshine in the shadie place;
Did neuer mortall eye behold such heauenly grace.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

It fortuned out of the thickest wood
   A ramping Lyon rushed suddainly,
   Hunting full greedie after saluage blood;
   Soone as the royall virgin he did spy,
   With gaping mouth at her ran greedily,
   To haue attonce deuour'd her tender corse:
   But to the pray when as he drew more ny,
   His bloudie rage asswaged with remorse,
And with the sight amazd, forgat his furious forse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In stead thereof he kist her wearie feet,
   And lickt her lilly hands with fawning tong,
   As he her wronged innocence did weet.
   O how can beautie maister the most strong,
   And simple truth subdue auenging wrong?
   Whose yeelded pride and proud submission,
   Still dreading death, when she had marked long,
   Her hart gan melt in great compassion,
And drizling teares did shed for pure affection.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Lyon Lord of euerie beast in field,
   Quoth she, his princely puissance doth abate,
   And mightie proud to humble weake does yield,
   Forgetfull of the hungry rage, which late
   Him prickt, in pittie of my sad estate:
   But he my Lyon, and my noble Lord,
   How does he find in cruell hart to hate
   Her that him lou'd, and euer most adord,
As the God of my life? why hath he me abhord?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Redounding teares did choke th'end of her plaint,
   Which softly ecchoed from the neighbour wood;
   And sad to see her sorrowfull constraint
   The kingly beast vpon her gazing stood;
   With pittie calmd, downe fell his angry mood.
   At last in close hart shutting vp her paine,
   Arose the virgin borne of heauenly brood,
   And to her snowy Palfrey got againe,
To seeke her strayed Champion, if she might attaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Lyon would not leaue her desolate,
   But with her went along, as a strong gard
   Of her chast person, and a faithfull mate
   Of her sad troubles and misfortunes hard:
   Still when she slept, he kept both watch and ward,
   And when she wakt, he waited diligent,
   With humble seruice to her will prepard:
   From her faire eyes he tooke commaundement,
And euer by her lookes conceiued her intent.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Long she thus traueiled through deserts wyde,
   By which she thought her wandring knight shold pas,
   Yet neuer shew of liuing wight espyde;
   Till that at length she found the troden gras,
   In which the tract of peoples footing was,
   Vnder the steepe foot of a mountaine hore;
   The same she followes, till at last she has
   A damzell spyde slow footing her before,
That on her shoulders sad a pot of water bore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

To whom approching she to her gan call,
   To weet, if dwelling place were nigh at hand;
   But the rude wench her answer'd nought at all,
   She could not heare, nor speake, nor vnderstand;
   Till seeing by her side the Lyon stand,
   With suddaine feare her pitcher downe she threw,
   And fled away: for neuer in that land
   Face of faire Ladie she before did vew,
And that dread Lyons looke her cast in deadly hew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Full fast she fled, ne euer lookt behynd,
   As if her life vpon the wager lay,
   And home she came, whereas her mother blynd
   Sate in eternall night: nought could she say,
   But suddaine catching hold, did her dismay
   With quaking hands, and other signs of feare:
   Who full of ghastly fright and cold affray,
   Gan shut the dore. By this arriued there
Dame Vna, wearie Dame, and entrance did requere.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which when none yeelded, her vnruly Page
   With his rude clawes the wicket open rent,
   And let her in; where of his cruell rage
   Nigh dead with feare, and faint astonishment,
   She found them both in darkesome corner pent;
   Where that old woman day and night did pray
   Vpon her beades deuoutly penitent;
   Nine hundred Pater nosters euery day,
And thrise nine hundred Aues she was wont to say.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And to augment her painefull pennance more,
   Thrise euery weeke in ashes she did sit,
   And next her wrinkled skin rough sackcloth wore,
   And thrise three times did fast from any bit:
   But now for feare her beads she did forget.
   Whose needlesse dread for to remoue away,
   Faire Vna framed words and count'nance fit:
   Which hardly doen, at length she gan them pray,
That in their cotage small, that night she rest her may.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The day is spent, and commeth drowsie night,
   When euery creature shrowded is in sleepe;
   Sad Vna downe her laies in wearie plight,
   And at her feet the Lyon watch doth keepe:
   In stead of rest, she does lament, and weepe
   For the late losse of her deare loued knight,
   And sighes, and grones, and euermore does steepe
   Her tender brest in bitter teares all night,
All night she thinks too long, and often lookes for light.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now when Aldeboran was mounted hie
   Aboue the shynie Cassiopeias chaire,
   And all in deadly sleepe did drowned lie,
   One knocked at the dore, and in would fare;
   He knocked fast, and often curst, and sware,
   That readie entrance was not at his call:
   For on his backe a heauy load he bare
   Of nightly stelths and pillage seuerall,
Which he had got abroad by purchase criminall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He was to weete a stout and sturdie thiefe,
   Wont to robbe Churches of their ornaments,
   And poore mens boxes of their due reliefe,
   Which giuen was to them for good intents;
   The holy Saints of their rich vestiments
   He did disrobe, when all men carelesse slept,
   And spoild the Priests of their habiliments,
   Whiles none the holy things in safety kept;
Then he by cunning sleights in at the window crept.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And all that he by right or wrong could find,
   Vnto this house he brought, and did bestow
   Vpon the daughter of this woman blind,
   Abessa daughter of Corceca slow,
   With whom he whoredome vsd, that few did know,
   And fed her fat with feast of offerings,
   And plentie, which in all the land did grow;
   Ne spared he to giue her gold and rings:
And now he to her brought part of his stolen things.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thus long the dore with rage and threats he bet,
   Yet of those fearefull women none durst rize,
   The Lyon frayed them, him in to let:
   He would no longer stay him to aduize,
   But open breakes the dore in furious wize,
   And entring is; when that disdainfull beast
   Encountring fierce, him suddaine doth surprize,
   And seizing cruell clawes on trembling brest,
Vnder his Lordly foot him proudly hath supprest.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Him booteth not resist, nor succour call,
   His bleeding hart is in the vengers hand,
   Who streight him rent in thousand peeces small,
   And quite dismembred hath: the thirstie land
   Drunke vp his life; his corse left on the strand.
   His fearefull friends weare out the wofull night,
   Ne dare to weepe, nor seeme to vnderstand
   The heauie hap, which on them is alight,
Affraid, least to themselues the like mishappen might.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now when broad day the world discouered has,
   Vp Vna rose, vp rose the Lyon eke,
   And on their former iourney forward pas,
   In wayes vnknowne, her wandring knight to seeke,
   With paines farre passing that long wandring Greeke,
   That for his loue refused deitie;
   Such were the labours of this Lady meeke,
   Still seeking him, that from her still did flie,
Then furthest from her hope, when most she weened nie.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Soone as she parted thence, the fearefull twaine,
   That blind old woman and her daughter deare
   Came forth, and finding Kirkrapine there slaine,
   For anguish great they gan to rend their heare,
   And beat their brests, and naked flesh to teare.
   And when they both had wept and wayld their fill,
   Then forth they ranne like two amazed deare,
   Halfe mad through malice, and reuenging will,
To follow her, that was the causer of their ill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whom ouertaking, they gan loudly bray,
   With hollow howling, and lamenting cry,
   Shamefully at her rayling all the way,
   And her accusing of dishonesty,
   That was the flowre of faith and chastity;
   And still amidst her rayling, she did pray,
   That plagues, and mischiefs, and long misery
   Might fall on her, and follow all the way,
And that in endlesse error she might euer stray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But when she saw her prayers nought preuaile,
   She backe returned with some labour lost;
   And in the way as she did weepe and waile,
   A knight her met in mighty armes embost,
   Yet knight was not for all his bragging bost,
   But subtill Archimag, that Vna sought
   By traynes into new troubles to haue tost:
   Of that old woman tydings he besought,
If that of such a Ladie she could tellen ought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith she gan her passion to renew,
   And cry, and curse, and raile, and rend her heare,
   Saying, that harlot she too lately knew,
   That causd her shed so many a bitter teare,
   And so forth told the story of her feare:
   Much seemed he to mone her haplesse chaunce,
   And after for that Ladie did inquere;
   Which being taught, he forward gan aduaunce
His fair enchaunted steed, and eke his charmed launce.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ere long he came, where Vna traueild slow,
   And that wilde Champion wayting her besyde:
   Whom seeing such, for dread he durst not show
   Himselfe too nigh at hand, but turned wyde
   Vnto an hill; from whence when she him spyde,
   By his like seeming shield, her knight by name
   She weend it was, and towards him gan ryde:
   Approching nigh, she wist it was the same,
And with faire fearefull humblesse towards him shee came.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And weeping said, Ah my long lacked Lord,
   Where haue ye bene thus long out of my sight?
   Much feared I to haue bene quite abhord,
   Or ought haue done, that ye displeasen might,
   That should as death vnto my deare hart light:
   For since mine eye your ioyous sight did mis,
   My chearefull day is turnd to chearelesse night,
   And eke my night of death the shadow is;
But welcome now my light, and shining lampe of blis.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He thereto meeting said, My dearest Dame,
   Farre be it from your thought, and fro my will,
   To thinke that knighthood I so much should shame,
   As you to leaue, that haue me loued still,
   And chose in Faery court of meere goodwill,
   Where noblest knights were to be found on earth:
   The earth shall sooner leaue her kindly skill
   To bring forth fruit, and make eternall derth,
Then I leaue you, my liefe, yborne of heauenly berth.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And sooth to say, why I left you so long,
   Was for to seeke aduenture in strange place,
   Where Archimago said a felon strong
   To many knights did daily worke disgrace;
   But knight he now shall neuer more deface:
   Good cause of mine excuse; that mote ye please
   Well to accept, and euermore embrace
   My faithfull seruice, that by land and seas
Haue vowd you to defend. Now then your plaint appease.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His louely words her seemd due recompence
   Of all her passed paines: one louing howre
   For many yeares of sorrow can dispence:
   A dram of sweet is worth a pound of sowre:
   She has forgot, how many a wofull stowre
   For him she late endur'd; she speakes no more
   Of past: true is, that true loue hath no powre
   To looken backe; his eyes be fixt before.
Before her stands her knight, for whom she toyld so sore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Much like, as when the beaten marinere,
   That long hath wandred in the Ocean wide,
   Oft soust in swelling Tethys saltish teare,
   And long time hauing tand his tawney hide
   With blustring breath of heauen, that none can bide,
   And scorching flames of fierce Orions hound,
   Soone as the port from farre he has espide,
   His chearefull whistle merrily doth sound,
And Nereus crownes with cups; his mates him pledg around.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Such ioy made Vna, when her knight she found;
   And eke th'enchaunter ioyous seemd no lesse,
   Then the glad marchant, that does vew from ground
   His ship farre come from watrie wildernesse,
   He hurles out vowes, and Neptune oft doth blesse:
   So forth they past, and all the way they spent
   Discoursing of her dreadfull late distresse,
   In which he askt her, what the Lyon ment:
Who told her all that fell in iourney as she went.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

They had not ridden farre, when they might see
   One pricking towards them with hastie heat,
   Full strongly armd, and on a courser free,
   That through his fiercenesse fomed all with sweat,
   And the sharpe yron did for anger eat,
   When his hot ryder spurd his chauffed side;
   His looke was sterne, and seemed still to threat
   Cruell reuenge, which he in hart did hyde,
And on his shield Sans loy in bloudie lines was dyde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

When nigh he drew vnto this gentle payre
   And saw the Red-crosse, which the knight did beare,
   He burnt in fire, and gan eftsoones prepare
   Himselfe to battell with his couched speare.
   Loth was that other, and did faint through feare,
   To taste th'vntryed dint of deadly steele;
   But yet his Lady did so well him cheare,
   That hope of new good hap he gan to feele;
So bent his speare, and spurnd his horse with yron heele.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But that proud Paynim forward came so fierce,
   And full of wrath, that with his sharp-head speare
   Through vainely crossed shield he quite did pierce,
   And had his staggering steede not shrunke for feare,
   Through shield and bodie eke he should him beare:
   Yet so great was the puissance of his push,
   That from his saddle quite he did him beare:
   He tombling rudely downe to ground did rush,
And from his gored wound a well of bloud did gush.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Dismounting lightly from his loftie steed,
   He to him lept, in mind to reaue his life,
   And proudly said, Lo there the worthie meed
   Of him, that slew Sansfoy with bloudie knife;
   Henceforth his ghost freed from repining strife,
   In peace may passen ouer Lethe lake,
   When morning altars purgd with enemies life,
   The blacke infernall Furies doen aslake:
   Life from Sansfoy thou tookst, Sansloy shall frõ thee take.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith in haste his helmet gan vnlace,
   Till Vna cride, O hold that heauie hand,
   Deare Sir, what euer that thou be in place:
   Enough is, that thy foe doth vanquisht stand
   Now at thy mercy: Mercie not withstand:
   For he is one the truest knight aliue,
   Though conquered now he lie on lowly land,
   And whilest him fortune fauourd, faire did thriue
In bloudie field: therefore of life him not depriue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her piteous words might not abate his rage,
   But rudely rending vp his helmet, would
   Haue slaine him straight: but when he sees his age,
   And hoarie head of Archimago old,
   His hastie hand he doth amazed hold,
   And halfe ashamed, wondred at the sight:
   For the old man well knew he, though vntold,
   In charmes and magicke to haue wondrous might,
Ne euer wont in field, ne in round lists to fight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And said, Why Archimago, lucklesse syre,
   What doe I see? what hard mishap is this,
   That hath thee hither brought to taste mine yre?
   Or thine the fault, or mine the error is,
   In stead of foe to wound my friend amis?
   He answered nought, but in a traunce still lay,
   And on those guilefull dazed eyes of his
   The cloud of death did sit. Which doen away,
He left him lying so, ne would no lenger stay.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But to the virgin comes, who all this while
   Amased stands, her selfe so mockt to see
   By him, who has the guerdon of his guile,
   For so misfeigning her true knight to bee:
   Yet is she now in more perplexitie,
   Left in the hand of that same Paynim bold,
   From whom her booteth not at all to flie;
   Who by her cleanly garment catching hold,
Her from her Palfrey pluckt, her visage to behold.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But her fierce seruant full of kingly awe
   And high disdaine, whenas his soueraine Dame
   So rudely handled by her foe he sawe,
   With gaping iawes full greedy at him came,
   And ramping on his shield, did weene the same
   Haue reft away with his sharpe rending clawes:
   But he was stout, and lust did now inflame
   His corage more, that frõ his griping pawes
He hath his shield redeem'd, and foorth his sword he drawes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O then too weake and feeble was the forse
   Of saluage beast, his puissance to withstand:
   For he was strong, and of so mightie corse,
   As euer wielded speare in warlike hand,
   And feates of armes did wisely vnderstand.
   Eftsoones he perced through his chaufed chest
   With thrilling point of deadly yron brand,
   And launcht his Lordly hart: with death opprest
He roar'd aloud, whiles life forsooke his stubborne brest.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who now is left to keepe the forlorne maid
   From raging spoile of lawlesse victors will?
   Her faithfull gard remou'd, her hope dismaid,
   Her selfe a yeelded pray to saue or spill.
   He now Lord of the field, his pride to fill,
   With foule reproches, and disdainfull spight
   Her vildly entertaines, and will or nill,
   Beares her away vpon his courser light:
Her prayers nought preuaile, his rage is more of might.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And all the way, with great lamenting paine,
   And piteous plaints she filleth his dull eares,
   That stony hart could riuen haue in twaine,
   And all the way she wets with flowing teares:
   But he enrag'd with rancor, nothing heares.
   Her seruile beast yet would not leaue her so,
   But followes her farre off, ne ought he feares,
   To be partaker of her wandring woe,
More mild in beastly kind, then that her beastly foe.

TITLE Faerie Queene, IV

RHYME a b a b

To sinfull house of Pride, Duessa
guides the faithfull knight,
Where brothers death to wreak Sansioy
doth chalenge him to fight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

YOung knight, what euer that dost armes professe,
   And through long labours huntest after fame,
   Beware of fraud, beware of ficklenesse,
   In choice, and change of thy deare loued Dame,
   Least thou of her beleeue too lightly blame,
   And rash misweening doe thy hart remoue:
   For vnto knight there is no greater shame,
   Then lightnesse and inconstancie in loue;
That doth this Redcrosse knights ensample plainly proue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who after that he had faire Vna lorne,
   Through light misdeeming of her loialtie,
   And false Duessa in her sted had borne,
   Called Fidess', and so supposd to bee;
   Long with her traueild, till at last they see
   A goodly building, brauely garnished,
   The house of mightie Prince it seemd to bee:
   And towards it a broad high way that led,
All bare through peoples feet, which thither traueiled.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Great troupes of people traueild thitherward
   Both day and night, of each degree and place,
   But few returned, hauing scaped hard,
   With balefull beggerie, or foule disgrace,
   Which euer after in most wretched case,
   Like loathsome lazars, by the hedges lay.
   Thither Duessa bad him bend his pace:
   For she is wearie of the toilesome way,
And also nigh consumed is the lingring day.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A stately Pallace built of squared bricke,
   Which cunningly was without morter laid,
   Whose wals were high, but nothing strong, nor thick,
   And golden foile all ouer them displaid,
   That purest skye with brightnesse they dismaid:
   High lifted vp were many loftie towres,
   And goodly galleries farre ouer laid,
   Full of faire windowes, and delightfull bowres;
And on the top a Diall told the timely howres.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

It was a goodly heape for to behould,
   And spake the praises of the workmans wit;
   But full great pittie, that so faire a mould
   Did on so weake foundation euer sit:
   For on a sandie hill, that still did flit,
   And fall away, it mounted was full hie,
   That euery breath of heauen shaked it:
   And all the hinder parts, that few could spie,
Were ruinous and old, but painted cunningly.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Arriued there they passed in forth right;
   For still to all the gates stood open wide,
   Yet charge of them was to a Porter hight
   Cald Maluenú, who entrance none denide:
   Thence to the hall, which was on euery side
   With rich array and costly arras dight:
   Infinite sorts of people did abide
   There waiting long, to win the wished sight
Of her, that was the Lady of that Pallace bright.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

By them they passe, all gazing on them round,
   And to the Presence mount; whose glorious vew
   Their frayle amazed senses did confound:
   In liuing Princes court none euer knew
   Such endlesse richesse, and so sumptuous shew;
   Ne Persia selfe, the nourse of pompous pride
   Like euer saw. And there a noble crew
   Of Lordes and Ladies stood on euery side
Which with their presence faire, the place much beautifide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

High aboue all a cloth of State was spred,
   And a rich throne, as bright as sunny day,
   On which there sate most braue embellished
   With royall robes and gorgeous array,
   A mayden Queene, that shone as Titans ray,
   In glistring gold, and peerelesse pretious stone:
   Yet her bright blazing beautie did assay
   To dim the brightnesse of her glorious throne,
As enuying her selfe, that too exceeding shone.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Exceeding shone, like Phoebus fairest childe,
   That did presume his fathers firie wayne,
   And flaming mouthes of steedes vnwonted wilde
   Through highest heauen with weaker hand to rayne;
   Proud of such glory and aduancement vaine,
   While flashing beames do daze his feeble eyen,
   He leaues the welkin way most beaten plaine,
   And rapt with whirling wheeles, inflames the skyen,
With fire not made to burne, but fairely for to shyne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So proud she shyned in her Princely state,
   Looking to heauen; for earth she did disdayne,
   And sitting high; for lowly she did hate:
   Lo vnderneath her scornefull feete, was layne
   A dreadfull Dragon with an hideous trayne,
   And in her hand she held a mirrhour bright,
   Wherein her face she often vewed fayne,
   And in her selfe-lou'd semblance tooke delight;
For she was wondrous faire, as any liuing wight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Of griesly Pluto she the daughter was,
   And sad Proserpina the Queene of hell;
   Yet did she thinke her pearelesse wroth to pas
   That parentage, with pride so did she swell,
   And thundring Ioue, that high in heauen doth dwell,
   And wield the world, she claymed for her syre,
   Or if that any else did Ioue excell:
   For to the highest she did still aspyre,
Or if ought higher were then that, did it desyre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And proud Lucifera men did her call,
   That made her selfe a Queene, and crownd to be,
   Yet rightfull kingdome she had none at all,
   Ne heritage of natiue soueraintie,
   But did vsurpe with wrong and tyrannie
   Vpon the scepter, which she now did hold:
   Ne ruld her Realmes with lawes, but pollicie,
   And strong aduizement of six wisards old,
That with their counsels bad her kingdome did vphold.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Soone as the Elfing knight in presence came,
   And false Duessa seeming Lady faire,
   A gentle Husher, Vanitie by name
   Made rowme, and passage for them did prepaire:
   So goodly brought them to the lowest staire
   Of her high throne, where they on humble knee
   Making obeyssance, did the cause declare,
   Why they were come, her royall state to see,
To proue the wide report of her great Maiestee.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

With loftie eyes, halfe loth to looke so low,
   She thanked them in her disdainefull wise,
   Ne other grace vouchsafed them to show
   Of Princesse worthy, scarse them bad arise.
   Her Lordes and Ladies all this while deuise
   Themselues to setten forth to straungers sight:
   Some frounce their curled haire in courtly guise,
   Some prancke their ruffes, and others trimly dight
Their gay attire: each others greater pride does spight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Goodly they all that knight do entertaine,
   Right glad with him to haue increast their crew:
   But to Duess' each one himselfe did paine
   All kindnesse and faire courtesie to shew;
   For in that court whylome her well they knew:
   Yet the stout Faerie mongst the middest crowd
   Thought all their glorie vaine in knightly vew,
   And that great Princesse too exceeding prowd,
That to strange knight no better countenance allowd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Suddein vpriseth from her stately place
   The royall Dame, and for her coche doth call:
   All hurtlen forth, and she with Princely pace,
   As faire Aurora in her purple pall,
   Out of the East the dawning day doth call:
   So forth she comes: her brightnesse brode doth blaze;
   The heapes of people thronging in the hall,
   Do ride each other, vpon her to gaze:
Her glorious glitterand light doth all mens eyes amaze.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So forth she comes, and to her coche does clyme,
   Adorned all with gold, and girlonds gay,
   That seemd as fresh as Flora in her prime,
   And stroue to match, in royall rich array,
   Great Iunoes golden chaire, the which they say
   The Gods stand gazing on, when she does ride
   To Ioues high house through heauens bras-paued way 
Drawne of faire Pecocks, that excell in pride,
And full of Argus eyes their tailes dispredden wide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But this was drawne of six vnequall beasts,
   On which her six sage Counsellours did ryde,
   Taught to obay their bestiall beheasts,
   With like conditions to their kinds applyde:
   Of which the first, that all the rest did guyde,
   Was sluggish Idlenesse the nourse of sin;
   Vpon a slouthfull Asse he chose to ryde,
   Arayd in habit blacke, and amis thin,
Like to an holy Monck, the seruice to begin.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And in his hand his Portesse still he bare,
   That much was worne, but therein little red,
   For of deuotion he had little care,
   Still drownd in sleepe, and most of his dayes ded;
   Scarse could he once vphold his heauie hed,
   To looken, whether it were night or day:
   May seeme the wayne was very euill led,
   When such an one had guiding of the way,
That knew not, whether right he went, or else astray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

From worldy cares himselfe he did esloyne,
   And greatly shunned manly exercise,
   From euery worke he chalenged essoyne,
   For contemplation sake: yet otherwise,
   His life he led in lawlesse riotise;
   By which he grew to grieuous malady;
   For in his lustlesse limbs through euill guise
   A shaking feuer raignd continually:
Such one was Idlenesse, first of this company.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And by his side rode loathsome Gluttony,
   Deformed creature, on a filthie swyne,
   His belly was vp-blowne with luxury,
   And eke with fatnesse swollen were his eyne,
   And like a Crane his necke was long and fyne,
   With which he swallowd vp excessiue feast,
   For want whereof poore people oft did pyne;
   And all the way, most like a brutish beast,
   He spued vp his gorge, that all did him deteast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In greene vine leaues he was right fitly clad;
   For other clothes he could not weare for heat,
   And on his head an yuie girland had,
   From vnder which fast trickled downe the sweat:
   Still as he rode, he somewhat still did eat,
   And in his hand did beare a bouzing can,
   Of which he supt so oft, that on his seat
   His dronken corse he scarse vpholden can,
In shape and life more like a monster, then a man.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vnfit he was for any worldy thing,
   And eke vnhable once to stirre or go,
   Not meet to be of counsell to a king,
   Whose mind in meat and drinke was drowned so,
   That from his friend he seldome knew his fo:
   Full of diseases was his carcas blew,
   And a dry dropsie through his flesh did flow:
   Which by misdiet daily greater grew:
Such one was Gluttony, the second of that crew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And next to him rode lustfull Lechery,
   Vpon a bearded Goat, whose rugged haire,
   And whally eyes (the signe of gelosy,)
   Was like the person selfe, whom he did beare:
   Who rough, and blacke, and filthy did appeare,
   Vnseemely man to please faire Ladies eye;
   Yet he of Ladies oft was loued deare,
   When fairer faces were bid standen by:
O who does know the bent of womens fantasy?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In a greene gowne he clothed was full faire,
   Which vnderneath did hide his filthinesse,
   And in his hand a burning hart he bare,
   Full of vaine follies, and new fanglenesse:
   For he was false, and fraught with ficklenesse,
   And learned had to loue with secret lookes,
   And well could daunce, and sing with ruefulnesse,
   And fortunes tell, and read in louing bookes,
And thousand other wayes, to bait his fleshly hookes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Inconstant man, that loued all he saw,
   And lusted after all, that he did loue,
   Ne would his looser life be tide to law,
   But ioyd weake wemens hearts to tempt, and proue
   If from their loyall loues he might then moue;
   Which lewdnesse fild him with reprochfull paine
   Of that fowle euill, which all men reproue,
   That rots the marrow, and consumes the braine:
Such one was Lecherie, the third of all this traine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And greedy Auarice by him did ride,
   Vpon a Camell loaden all with gold;
   Two iron coffers hong on either side,
   With precious mettall full, as they might hold,
   And in his lap an heape of coine he told;
   For of his wicked pelfe his God he made,
   And vnto hell him selfe for money sold;
   Accursed vsurie was all his trade,
And right and wrong ylike in equall ballaunce waide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His life was nigh vnto deaths doore yplast,
   And thred-bare cote, and cobled shoes he ware,
   Ne scarse good morsell all his life did tast,
   But both from backe and belly still did spare,
   To fill his bags, and richesse to compare;
   Yet chylde ne kinsman liuing had he none
   To leaue them to; but thorough daily care
   To get, and nightly feare to lose his owne,
He led a wretched life vnto him selfe vnknowne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Most wretched wight, whom nothing might suffise,
   Whose greedy lust did lacke in greatest store,
   Whose need had end, but no end couetise,
   Whose wealth was want, whose plẽty made him pore,
   Who had enough, yet wished euer more;
   A vile disease, and eke in foote and hand
   A grieuous gout tormented him full sore,
   That well he could not touch, nor go, nor stand:
Such one was Auarice, the fourth of this faire band.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And next to him malicious Enuie rode,
   Vpon a rauenous wolfe, and still did chaw
   Betweene his cankred teeth a venemous tode,
   That all the poison ran about his chaw;
   But inwardly he chawed his owne maw
   At neighbours wealth, that made him euer sad;
   For death it was, when any good he saw,
   And wept, that cause of weeping none he had,
But when he heard of harme, he wexed wondrous glad.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

All in a kirtle of discolourd say
   He clothed was, ypainted full of eyes;
   And in his bosome secretly there lay
   An hatefull Snake, the which his taile vptyes
   In many folds, and mortall sting implyes.
   Still as he rode, he gnasht his teeth, to see
   Those heapes of gold with griple Couetyse,
   And grudged at the great felicitie
Of proud Lucifera, and his owne companie.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He hated all good workes and vertuous deeds,
   And him no lesse, that any like did vse,
   And who with gracious bread the hungry feeds,
   His almes for want of faith he doth accuse;
   So euery good to bad he doth abuse:
   And eke the verse of famous Poets witt
   He does backebite, and spightfull poison spues
   From leprous mouth on all, that euer writt:
Such one vile Enuie was, that fift in row did sitt.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And him beside rides fierce reuenging VVrath,
   Vpon a Lion, loth for to be led;
   And in his hand a burning brond he hath,
   The which he brandisheth about his hed;
   His eyes did hurle forth sparkles fiery red,
   And stared sterne on all, that him beheld,
   As ashes pale of hew and seeming ded;
   And on his dagger still his hand he held,
Trembling through hasty rage, whẽ choler in him sweld.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His ruffin raiment all was staind with blood,
   Which he had spilt, and all to rags yrent,
   Through vnaduized rashnesse woxen wood;
   For of his hands he had no gouernement,
   Ne car'd for bloud in his auengement:
   But when the furious fit was ouerpast,
   His cruell facts he often would repent;
   Yet wilfull man he neuer would forecast,
How many mischieues should ensue his heedlesse hast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Full many mischiefes follow cruell VVrath;
   Abhorred bloudshed, and tumultuous strife,
   Vnmanly murder, and vnthrifty scath,
   Bitter despight, with rancours rusty knife,
   And fretting griefe the enemy of life;
   All these, and many euils moe haunt ire,
   The swelling Splene, and Frenzy raging rife,
   The shaking Palsey, and Saint Fraunces fire:
Such one was VVrath, the last of this vngodly tire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And after all, vpon the wagon beame
   Rode Sathan, with a smarting whip in hand,
   With which he forward lasht the laesie teme,
   So oft as Slowth still in the mire did stand.
   Huge routs of people did about them band,
   Showting for ioy, and still before their way
   A foggy mist had couered all the land;
   And vnderneath their feet, all scattered lay
Dead sculs & bones of men, whose life had gone astray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So forth they marchen in this goodly sort,
   To take the solace of the open aire,
   And in fresh flowring fields themselues to sport;
   Emongst the rest rode that false Lady faire,
   The fowle Duessa, next vnto the chaire
   Of proud Lucifer', as one of the traine:
   But that good knight would not so nigh repaire,
   Him selfe estraunging from their ioyaunce vaine,
Whose fellowship seemd far vnfit for warlike swaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So hauing solaced themselues a space
   With pleasaunce of the breathing fields yfed
   They backe returned to the Princely Place;
   Whereas an errant knight in armes ycled,
   And heathnish shield, wherein with letters red
   Was writ Sans ioy, they new arriued find:
   Enflam'd with fury and fiers hardy-hed,
   He seemd in hart to harbour thoughts vnkind,
And nourish bloudy vengeaunce in his bitter mind.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who when the shamed shield of slaine Sans foy
   He spide with that same Faery champions page,
   Bewraying him, that did of late destroy
   His eldest brother, burning all with rage
   He to him leapt, and that same enuious gage
   Of victors glory from him snatcht away:
   But th'Elfin knight, which ought that warlike wage,
   Disdaind to loose the meed he wonne in fray,
And him rencountring fierce, reskewd the noble pray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith they gan to hurtlen greedily,
   Redoubted battaile ready to darrayne,
   And clash their shields, and shake their swords on hy,
   That with their sturre they troubled all the traine;
   Till that great Queene vpon eternall paine
   Of high displeasure, that ensewen might,
   Commaunded them their fury to refraine,
   And if that either to that shield had right,
In equall lists they should the morrow next it fight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ah dearest Dame, (quoth then the Paynim bold,)
   Pardon the errour of enraged wight,
   Whom great griefe made forget the raines to hold
   Of reasons rule, to see this recreant knight,
   No knight, but treachour full of false despight
   And shamefull treason, who through guile hath slayn
   The prowest knight, that euer field did fight,
   Euen stout Sans foy (O who can then refrayn?)
Whose shield he beares renuerst, the more to heape disdayn.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And to augment the glorie of his guile,
   His dearest loue the faire Fidessa loe
   Is there possessed of the traytour vile,
   Who reapes the haruest sowen by his foe,
   Sowen in bloudy field, and bought with woe:
   That brothers hand shall dearely well requight
   So be, ô Queene, you equall fauour showe.
   Him litle answerd th'angry Elfin knight;
He neuer meant with words, but swords to plead his right.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But threw his gauntlet as a sacred pledge,
   His cause in combat the next day to try:
   So been they parted both, with harts on edge,
   To be aueng'd each on his enimy.
   That night they pas in ioy and iollity,
   Feasting and courting both in bowre and hall;
   For Steward was excessiue Gluttonie,
   That of his plenty poured forth to all:
Which doen, the Chamberlain Slowth did to rest them call.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now whenas darkesome night had all displayd
   Her coleblacke curtein ouer brightest skye,
   The warlike youthes on dayntie couches layd,
   Did chace away sweet sleepe from sluggish eye,
   To muse on meanes of hoped victory.
   But whenas Morpheus had with leaden mace
   Arrested all that courtly company,
   Vp-rose Duessa from her resting place,
And to the Paynims lodging comes with silent pace.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whom broad awake she finds, in troublous fit,
   Forecasting, how his foe he might annoy,
   And him amoues with speaches seeming fit:
   Ah deare Sans ioy, next dearest to Sans foy,
   Cause of my new griefe, cause of my new ioy,
   Ioyous, to see his ymage in mine eye,
   And greeu'd, to thinke how foe did him destroy,
   That was the flowre of grace and cheualrye;
Lo his Fidessa to thy secret faith I flye.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

With gentle wordes he can her fairely greet,
   And bad say on the secret of her hart.
   Then sighing soft, I learne that litle sweet
   Oft tempred is (quoth she) with muchell smart:
   For since my brest was launcht with louely dart
   Of deare Sansfoy, I neuer ioyed howre,
   But in eternall woes my weaker hart
   Haue wasted, louing him with all my powre,
And for his sake haue felt full many an heauie stowre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last when perils all I weened past,
   And hop'd to reape the crop of all my care,
   Into new woes vnweeting I was cast,
   By this false faytor, who vnworthy ware
   His worthy shield, whom he with guilefull snare
   Entrapped slew, and brought to shamefull graue.
   Me silly maid away with him he bare,
   And euer since hath kept in darksome caue,
For that I would not yeeld, that to Sans-foy I gaue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But since faire Sunne hath sperst that lowring clowd,
   And to my loathed life now shewes some light,
   Vnder your beames I will me safely shrowd,
   From dreaded storme of his disdainfull spight:
   To you th'inheritance belongs by right
   Of brothers prayse, to you eke longs his loue.
   Let not his loue, let not his restlesse spright
   Be vnreueng'd, that calles to you aboue
From wandring Stygian shores, where it doth endlesse moue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thereto said he, Faire Dame be nought dismaid
   For sorrowes past; their griefe is with them gone:
   Ne yet of present perill be affraid;
   For needlesse feare did neuer vantage none,
   And helplesse hap it booteth not to mone.
   Dead is Sans-foy, his vitall paines are past,
   Though greeued ghost for vengeance deepe do grone:
   He liues, that shall him pay his dewties last,
And guiltie Elfin bloud shall sacrifice in hast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O but I feare the fickle freakes (quoth shee)
   Of fortune false, and oddes of armes in field.
   Why dame (quoth he) what oddes can euer bee,
   Where both do fight alike, to win or yield?
   Yea but (quoth she) he beares a charmed shield,
   And eke enchaunted armes, that none can perce,
   Ne none can wound the man, that does them wield.
   Charmd or enchaunted (answerd he then ferce)
I no whit reck, ne you the like need to reherce.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But faire Fidessa, sithens fortunes guile,
   Or enimies powre hath now captiued you,
   Returne from whence ye came, and rest a while
   Till morrow next, that I the Elfe subdew,
   And with Sans-foyes dead dowry you endew.
   Ay me, that is a double death (she said)
   With proud foes sight my sorrow to renew:
   Where euer yet I be, my secrete aid
Shall follow you. So passing forth she him obaid.

TITLE Faerie Queene V

RHYME a b a b

The faithfull knight in equall field
subdewes his faithlesse foe,
Whom false Duessa saues, and for
his cure to hell does goe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c

THe noble hart, that harbours vertuous thought,
   And is with child of glorious great intent,
   Can neuer rest, vntill it forth haue brought
   Th'eternall brood of glorie excellent:
   Such restlesse passion did all night torment
   The flaming corage of that Faery knight,
   Deuizing, how that doughtie turnament
   With greatest honour he atchieuen might;

RHYME a b c b c c d c d d

Still did he wake, and still did watch for dawning light.
At last the golden Orientall gate
   Of greatest heauen gan to open faire,
   And Phoebus fresh, as bridegrome to his mate,
   Came dauncing forth, shaking his deawie haire:
   And hurld his glistring beames through gloomy aire.
   Which when the wakeful Elfe perceiu'd, streight way
   He started vp, and did him selfe prepaire,
   In sun-bright armes, and battailous array:
For with that Pagan proud he combat will that day.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And forth he comes into the commune hall,
   Where earely waite him many a gazing eye,
   To weet what end to straunger knights may fall.
   There many Minstrales maken melody,
   To driue away the dull melancholy,
   And many Bardes, that to the trembling chord
   Can tune their timely voyces cunningly,
   And many Chroniclers, that can record
Old loues, and warres for Ladies doen by many a Lord.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Soone after comes the cruell Sarazin,
   In wouen maile all armed warily,
   And sternly lookes at him, who not a pin
   Does care for looke of liuing creatures eye.
   They bring them wines of Greece and Araby,
   And daintie spices fetcht from furthest Ynd,
   To kindle heat of corage priuily:
   And in the wine a solemne oth they bynd
T'obserue the sacred lawes of armes, that are assynd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last forth comes that far renowmed Queene,
   With royall pomp and Princely maiestie;
   She is ybrought vnto a paled greene,
   And placed vnder stately canapee,
   The warlike feates of both those knights to see.
   On th'other side in all mens open vew
   Duessa placed is, and on a tree
   Sans-foy his shield is hangd with bloudy hew:
Both those the lawrell girlonds to the victor dew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A shrilling trompet sownded from on hye,
   And vnto battaill bad them selues addresse:
   Their shining shieldes about their wrestes they tye,
   And burning blades about their heads do blesse,
   The instruments of wrath and heauinesse:
   With greedy force each other doth assayle,
   And strike so fiercely, that they do impresse
   Deepe dinted furrowes in the battred mayle;
The yron walles to ward their blowes are weake & fraile.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Sarazin was stout, and wondrous strong,
   And heaped blowes like yron hammers great:
   For after bloud and vengeance he did long.
   The knight was fiers, and full of youthly heat:
   And doubled strokes, like dreaded thunders threat:
   For all for prayse and honour he did fight.
   Both stricken strike, and beaten both do beat,
   That from their shields forth flyeth firie light,
And helmets hewen deepe, shew marks of eithers might.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So th'one for wrong, the other striues for right:
   As when a Gryfon seized of his pray,
   A Dragon fiers encountreth in his flight,
   Through widest ayre making his ydle way,
   That would his rightfull rauine rend away:
   With hideous horrour both together smight,
   And souce so sore, that they the heauens affray:
   The wise Southsayer seeing so sad sight,
Th'amazed vulgar tels of warres and mortall fight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So th'one for wrong, the other striues for right,
   And each to deadly shame would driue his foe:
   The cruell steele so greedily doth bight
   In tender flesh, that streames of bloud down flow,
   With which the armes, that earst so bright did show,
   Into a pure vermillion now are dyde:
   Great ruth in all the gazers harts did grow,
   Seeing the gored woundes to gape so wyde,
That victory they dare not wish to either side.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last the Paynim chaunst to cast his eye,
   His suddein eye, flaming with wrathfull fyre,
   Vpon his brothers shield, which hong thereby:
   Therewith redoubled was his raging yre,
   And said, Ah wretched sonne of wofull syre,
   Doest thou sit wayling by black Stygian lake,
   Whilest here thy shield is hangd for victors hyre,
   And sluggish german doest thy forces slake,
To after-send his foe, that him may ouertake?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Goe caytiue Elfe, him quickly ouertake,
   And soone redeeme from his long wandring woe;
   Goe guiltie ghost, to him my message make,
   That I his shield haue quit from dying foe.
   Therewith vpon his crest he stroke him so,
   That twise he reeled, readie twise to fall;
   End of the doubtfull battell deemed tho
   The lookers on, and lowd to him gan call
The false Duessa, Thine the shield, and I, and all.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Soone as the Faerie heard his Ladie speake,
   Out of his swowning dreame he gan awake,
   And quickning faith, that earst was woxen weake,
   The creeping deadly cold away did shake:
   Tho mou'd with wrath, and shame, and Ladies sake,
   Of all attonce he cast auengd to bee,
   And with so'exceeding furie at him strake,
   That forced him to stoupe vpon his knee;
Had he not stouped so, he should haue clouen bee.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And to him said, Goe now proud Miscreant,
   Thy selfe thy message doe to german deare,
   Alone he wandring thee too long doth want:
   Goe say, his foe thy shield with his doth beare.
   Therewith his heauie hand he high gan reare,
   Him to haue slaine; when loe a darkesome clowd
   Vpon him fell: he no where doth appeare,
   But vanisht is. The Elfe him cals alowd,
But answer none receiues: the darknes him does shrowd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In haste Duessa from her place arose,
   And to him running said, O prowest knight,
   That euer Ladie to her loue did chose,
   Let now abate the terror of your might,
   And quench the flame of furious despight,
   And bloudie vengeance; lo th'infernall powres
   Couering your foe with cloud of deadly night,
   Haue borne him hence to Plutoes balefull bowres.
The conquest yours, I yours, the shield, and glory yours.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Not all so satisfide, with greedie eye
   He sought all round about, his thirstie blade
   To bath in bloud of faithlesse enemy;
   Who all that while lay hid in secret shade:
   He standes amazed, how he thence should fade.
   At last the trumpets Triumph sound on hie,
   And running Heralds humble homage made,
   Greeting him goodly with new victorie,
And to him brought the shield, the cause of enmitie.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Wherewith he goeth to that soueraine Queene,
   And falling her before on lowly knee,
   To her makes present of his seruice seene:
   Which she accepts, with thankes, and goodly gree,
   Greatly aduauncing his gay cheualree.
   So marcheth home, and by her takes the knight,
   Whom all the people follow with great glee,
   Shouting, and clapping all their hands on hight,
That all the aire it fils, and flyes to heauen bright.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Home is he brought, and laid in sumptuous bed:
   Where many skilfull leaches him abide,
   To salue his hurts, that yet still freshly bled.
   In wine and oyle they wash his woundes wide,
   And softly can embalme on euery side.
   And all the while, most heauenly melody
   About the bed sweet musicke did diuide,
   Him to beguile of griefe and agony:
And all the while Duessa wept full bitterly.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

As when a wearie traueller that strayes
   By muddy shore of broad seuen-mouthed Nile,
   Vnweeting of the perillous wandring wayes,
   Doth meet a cruell craftie Crocodile,
   Which in false griefe hyding his harmefull guile,
   Doth weepe full sore, and sheddeth tender teares:
   The foolish man, that pitties all this while
   His mournefull plight, is swallowd vp vnwares,
Forgetfull of his owne, that mindes anothers cares.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So wept Duessa vntill euentide,
   That shyning lampes in Ioues high house were light:
   Then forth she rose, ne lenger would abide,
   But comes vnto the place, where th'Hethen knight
   In slombring swownd nigh voyd of vitall spright,
   Lay couer'd with inchaunted cloud all day:
   Whom when she found, as she him left in plight,
   To wayle his woefull case she would not stay,
But to the easterne coast of heauen makes speedy way.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Where griesly Night, with visage deadly sad,
   That Phoebus chearefull face durst neuer vew,
   And in a foule blacke pitchie mantle clad,
   She findes forth comming from her darkesome mew,
   Where she all day did hide her hated hew.
   Before the dore her yron charet stood,
   Alreadie harnessed for iourney new;
   And coleblacke steedes yborne of hellish brood,
That on their rustie bits did champ, as they were wood.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who when she saw Duessa sunny bright,
   Adornd with gold and iewels shining cleare,
   She greatly grew amazed at the sight,
   And th'vnacquainted light began to feare:
   For neuer did such brightnesse there appeare,
   And would haue backe retyred to her caue,
   Vntill the witches speech she gan to heare,
   Saying, Yet ô thou dreaded Dame, I craue
Abide, till I haue told the message, which I haue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She stayd, and foorth Duessa gan proceede,
   O thou most auncient Grandmother of all,
   More old then Ioue, whom thou at first didst breede,
   Or that great house of Gods cælestiall,
   Which wast begot in Dæmogorgons hall,
   And sawst the secrets of the world vnmade,
   Why suffredst thou thy Nephewes deare to fall
   With Elfin sword, most shamefully betrade?
Lo where the stout Sansioy doth sleepe in deadly shade.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And him before, I saw with bitter eyes
   The bold Sansfoy shrinke vnderneath his speare;
   And now the pray of fowles in field he lyes,
   Nor wayld of friends, nor laid on groning beare,
   That whylome was to me too dearely deare.
   O what of Gods then boots it to be borne,
   If old Aveugles sonnes so euill heare?
   Or who shall not great Nightes children scorne,
When two of three her Nephews are so fowle forlorne?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vp then, vp dreary Dame, of darknesse Queene,
   Go gather vp the reliques of thy race,
   Or else goe them auenge, and let be seene,
   That dreaded Night in brightest day hath place,
   And can the children of faire light deface.
   Her feeling speeches some compassion moued
   In hart, and chaunge in that great mothers face:
   Yet pittie in her hart was neuer proued
Till then: for euermore she hated, neuer loued.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And said, Deare daughter rightly may I rew
   The fall of famous children borne of mee,
   And good successes, which their foes ensew:
   But who can turne the streame of destinee,
   Or breake the chayne of strong necessitee,
   Which fast is tyde to Ioues eternall seat?
   The sonnes of Day he fauoureth, I see,
   And by my ruines thinkes to make them great:
To make one great by others losse, is bad excheat.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Yet shall they not escape so freely all;
   For some shall pay the price of others guilt:
   And he the man that made Sansfoy to fall,
   Shall with his owne bloud price that he hath spilt.
   But what art thou, that telst of Nephews kilt?
   I that do seeme not I, Duessa am,
   (Quoth she) how euer now in garments gilt,
   And gorgeous gold arayd I to thee came;
Duessa I, the daughter of Deceipt and Shame.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then bowing downe her aged backe, she kist
   The wicked witch, saying; In that faire face
   The false resemblance of Deceipt, I wist
   Did closely lurke; yet so true-seeming grace
   It carried, that I scarse in darkesome place
   Could it discerne, though I the mother bee
   Of falshood, and root of Duessaes race.
   O welcome child, whom I haue longd to see,
And how haue seene vnwares. Lo now I go with thee.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then to her yron wagon she betakes,
   And with her beares the fowle welfauourd witch:
   Through mirkesome aire her readie way she makes.
   Her twyfold Teme, of which two blacke as pitch,
   And two were browne, yet each to each vnlich,
   Did softly swim away, ne euer stampe,
   Vnlesse she chaunst their stubborne mouths to twitch;  
Then foming tarre, their bridles they would champe,
And trampling the fine element, would fiercely rampe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So well they sped, that they be come at length
   Vnto the place, whereas the Paynim lay,
   Deuoid of outward sense, and natiue strength,
   Couerd with charmed cloud from vew of day,
   And sight of men, since his late luckelesse fray.
   His cruell wounds with cruddy bloud congealed,
   They binden vp so wisely, as they may,
   And handle softly, till they can be healed:
So lay him in her charet, close in night concealed.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And all the while she stood vpon the ground,
   The wakefull dogs did neuer cease to bay,
   As giuing warning of th'vnwonted sound,
   With which her yron wheeles did them affray,
   And her darke griesly looke them much dismay;
   The messenger of death, the ghastly Owle
   With drearie shriekes did also her bewray;
   And hungry Wolues continually did howle,
At her abhorred face, so filthy and so fowle.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thence turning backe in silence soft they stole,
   And brought the heauie corse with easie pace
   To yawning gulfe of deepe Auernus hole.
   By that same hole an entrance darke and bace
   With smoake and sulphure hiding all the place,
   Descends to hell: there creature neuer past,
   That backe returned without heauenly grace;
   But dreadfull Furies, which their chaines haue brast,
And damned sprights sent forth to make ill men aghast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

By that same way the direfull dames doe driue
   Their mournefull charet, fild with rusty blood,
   And downe to Plutoes house are come biliue:
   Which passing through, on euery side them stood
   The trembling ghosts with sad amazed mood,
   Chattring their yron teeth, and staring wide
   With stonie eyes; and all the hellish brood
   Of feends infernall flockt on euery side,
To gaze on earthly wight, that with the Night durst ride.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

They pas the bitter waues of Acheron,
   Where many soules sit wailing woefully,
   And come to fiery flood of Phlegeton,
   Whereas the damned ghosts in torments fry,
   And with sharpe shrilling shriekes doe bootlesse cry,
   Cursing high Ioue, the which them thither sent.
   The house of endlesse paine is built thereby,
   In which ten thousand sorts of punishment
The cursed creatures doe eternally torment.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Before the threshold dreadfull Cerberus
   His three deformed heads did lay along,
   Curled with thousand adders venemous,
   And lilled forth his bloudie flaming tong:
   At them he gan to reare his bristles strong,
   And felly gnarre, vntill dayes enemy
   Did him appease; then downe his taile he hong
   And suffered them to passen quietly:
For she in hell and heauen had power equally.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There was Ixion turned on a wheele,
   For daring tempt the Queene of heauen to sin;
   And Sisyphus an huge round stone did reele
   Against an hill, ne might from labour lin;
   There thirstie Tantalus hong by the chin;
   And Tityus fed a vulture on his maw;
   Typhoeus ioynts were stretched on a gin,
   Theseus condemned to endlesse slouth by law,
And fifty sisters water in leake vessels draw.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

They all beholding worldly wights in place,
   Leaue off their worke, vnmindfull of their smart,
   To gaze on them; who forth by them doe pace,
   Till they be come vnto the furthest part:
   Where was a Caue ywrought by wondrous art,
   Deepe, darke, vneasie, dolefull, comfortlesse,
   In which sad Æsculapius farre a part
   Emprisond was in chaines remedilesse,
For that Hippolytus rent corse he did redresse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Hippolytus a iolly huntsman was,
   That wont in charet chace the foming Bore;
   He all his Peeres in beautie did surpas,
   But Ladies loue as losse of time forbore:
   His wanton stepdame loued him the more,
   But when she saw her offred sweets refused
   Her loue she turnd to hate, and him before
   His father fierce of treason false accused,
And with her gealous termes his open eares abused.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who all in rage his Sea-god syre besought,
   Some cursed vengeance on his sonne to cast:
   From surging gulf two monsters straight were brought,
   With dread whereof his chasing steedes aghast,
   Both charet swift and huntsman ouercast.
   His goodly corps on ragged cliffs yrent,
   Was quite dismembred, and his members chast
   Scattered on euery mountaine, as he went,
That of Hippolytus was left no moniment.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His cruell stepdame seeing what was donne,
   Her wicked dayes with wretched knife did end,
   In death auowing th'innocence of her sonne.
   Which hearing his rash Syre, began to rend
   His haire, and hastie tongue, that did offend:
   Tho gathering vp the relicks of his smart
   By Dianes meanes, who was Hippolyts frend,
   Them brought to Æsculape, that by his art
Did heale them all againe, and ioyned euery part.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Such wondrous science in mans wit to raine
   When Ioue auizd, that could the dead reuiue,
   And fates expired could renew againe,
   Of endlesse life he might him not depriue,
   But vnto hell did thrust him downe aliue,
   With flashing thunderbolt ywounded sore:
   Where long remaining, he did alwaies striue
   Himselfe wilth salues to health for to restore,
And slake the heauenly fire, that raged euermore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There auncient Night arriuing, did alight
   From her nigh wearie waine, and in her armes
   To Æsculapius brought the wounded knight:
   Whom hauing softly disarayd of armes,
   Tho gan to him discouer all his harmes,
   Beseeching him with prayer, and with praise,
   If either salues, or oyles, or herbes, or charmes
   A fordonne wight from dore of death mote raise,
He would at her request prolong her nephews daies.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ah Dame (quoth he) thou temptest me in vaine,
   To dare the thing, which daily yet I rew,
   And the old cause of my continued paine
   With like attempt to like end to renew.
   Is not enough, that thrust from heauen dew
   Here endlesse penance for one fault I pay,
   But that redoubled crime with vengeance new
   Thou biddest me to eeke? Can Night defray
The wrath of thundring Ioue, that rules both night and day?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Not so (quoth she) but sith that heauens king
   From hope of heauen hath thee excluded quight,
   Why fearest thou, that canst not hope for thing,
   And fearest not, that more thee hurten might,
   Now in the powre of euerlasting Night?
   Goe to then, ô thou farre renowmed sonne
   Of great Apollo, shew thy famous might
   In medicine, that else hath to thee wonne
Great paines, & greater praise, both neuer to be donne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her words preuaild: And then the learned leach
   His cunning hand gan to his wounds to lay,
   And all things else, the which his art did teach:
   Which hauing seene, from thence arose away
   The mother of dread darknesse, and let stay
   Aueugles sonne there in the leaches cure,
   And backe returning tooke her wonted way,
   To runne her timely race, whilst Phoebus pure
In westerne waues his wearie wagon did recure.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The false Duessa leauing noyous Night,
   Returnd to stately pallace of dame Pride;
   Where when she came, she found the Faery knight
   Departed thence, albe his woundes wide
   Not throughly heald, vnreadie were to ride.
   Good cause he had to hasten thence away;
   For on a day his wary Dwarfe had spide,
   Where in a dongeon deepe huge numbers lay
Of caytiue wretched thrals, that wayled night and day.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A ruefull sight, as could be seene with eie;
   Of whom he learned had in secret wise
   The hidden cause of their captiuitie,
   How mortgaging their liues to Couetise,
   Through wastfull Pride, and wanton Riotise,
   They were by law of that proud Tyrannesse
   Prouokt with VVrath, and Enuies false surmise,
Condemned to that Dongeon mercilesse,
Where they should liue in woe, & die in wretchednesse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There was that great proud king of Babylon,
   That would compell all nations to adore,
   And him as onely God to call vpon,
   Till through celestiall doome throwne out of dore,
   Into an Oxe he was transform'd of yore:
   There also was king Croesus, that enhaunst
   His heart too high through his great riches store;
   And proud Antiochus, the which aduaunst
His cursed hand gainst God, and on his altars daunst.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And them long time before, great Nimrod was,
   That first the world with sword and fire warrayd;
   And after him old Ninus farre did pas
   In princely pompe, of all the world obayd;
   There also was that mightie Monarch layd
   Low vnder all, yet aboue all in pride,
   That name of natiue syre did fowle vpbrayd,
   And would as Ammons sonne be magnifide,
Till scornd of God and man a shamefull death he dide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

All these together in one heape were throwne,
   Like carkases of beasts in butchers stall.
   And in another corner wide were strowne
   The antique ruines of the Romaines fall:
   Great Romulus the Grandsyre of them all,
   Proud Tarquin, and too lordly Lentulus,
   Stout Scipio, and stubborne Hanniball,
   Ambitious Sylla, and sterne Marius,
High Cæsar, great Pompey, and fierce Antonius.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Amongst these mighty men were wemen mixt,
   Proud wemen, vaine, forgetfull of their yoke:
   The bold Semiramis, whose sides transfixt
   With sonnes owne blade, her fowle reproches spoke;
   Faire Sthenoboea, that her selfe did choke
   With wilfull cord, for wanting of her will;
   High minded Cleopatra, that with stroke
   Of Aspes sting her selfe did stoutly kill:
And thousands moe the like, that did that dongeon fill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Besides the endlesse routs of wretched thralles,
   Which thither were assembled day by day,
   From all the world after their wofull falles,
   Through wicked pride, and wasted wealthes decay.
   But most of all, which in the Dongeon lay
   Fell from high Princes courts, or Ladies bowres,
   Where they in idle pompe, or wanton play,
   Consumed had their goods, and thriftlesse howres,
And lastly throwne themselues into these heauy stowres.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whose case when as the carefull Dwarfe had tould,
   And made ensample of their mournefull sight
   Vnto his maister, he no lenger would
   There dwell in perill of like painefull plight,
   But early rose, and ere that dawning light
   Discouered had the world to heauen wyde,
   He by a priuie Posterne tooke his flight,
   That of no enuious eyes he mote be spyde:
For doubtlesse death ensewd, if any him descryde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Scarse could he footing find in that fowle way,
   For many corses, like a great Lay-stall
   Of murdred men which therein strowed lay,
   Without remorse, or decent funerall:
   Which all through that great Princesse pride did fall
   And came to shamefull end. And them beside
   Forth ryding vnderneath the castell wall,
   A donghill of dead carkases he spide,
The dreadfull spectacle of that sad house of Pride.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

TITLE Faerie Queene

RHYME a b a b

From lawlesse lust by wondrous grace
fayre Vna is releast:
Whom saluage nation does adore,
and learnes her wise beheast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

AS when a ship, that flyes faire vnder saile,
An hidden rocke escaped hath vnwares,
That lay in waite her wrack for to bewaile,
The Marriner yet halfe amazed stares
At perill past, and yet in doubt ne dares
To ioy at his foole-happie ouersight:
So doubly is distrest twixt ioy and cares
The dreadlesse courage of this Elfin knight,
Hauing escapt so sad ensamples in his sight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Yet sad he was that his too hastie speed
The faire Duess' had forst him leaue behind;
And yet more sad, that Vna his deare dreed
Her truth had staind with treason so vnkind;
Yet crime in her could neuer creature find,
But for his loue, and for her owne selfe sake,
She wandred had from one to other Ynd,
Him for to seeke, ne euer would forsake,
Till her vnwares the fierce Sansloy did ouertake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who after Archimagoes fowle defeat,
Led her away into a forrest wilde,
And turning wrathfull fire to lustfull heat,
With beastly sin thought her to haue defilde,
And made the vassall of his pleasures vilde.
Yet first he cast by treatie, and by traynes,
Her to perswade, that stubborne fort to yilde:
For greater conquest of hard loue he gaynes,
That workes it to his will, then he that it constraines.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

With fawning wordes he courted her a while,
And looking louely, and oft sighing sore,
Her constant hart did tempt with diuerse guile:
But wordes, and lookes, and sighes she did abhore,
As rocke of Diamond stedfast euermore.
Yet for to feed his fyrie lustfull eye,
He snatcht the vele, that hong her face before;
Then gan her beautie shine, as brightest skye,
And burnt his beastly hart t'efforce her chastitye.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So when he saw his flatt'ring arts to fayle,
And subtile engines bet from batteree,
With greedy force he gan the fort assayle,
Whereof he weend possessed soone to bee,
And win rich spoile of ransackt chastetee.
Ah heauens, that do this hideous act behold,
And heauenly virgin thus outraged see,
How can ye vengeance iust so long withhold,
And hurle not flashing flames vpon that Paynim bold?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The pitteous maiden carefull comfortlesse,
Does throw out thrilling shriekes, & shrieking cryes,
The last vaine helpe of womens great distresse,
And with loud plaints importuneth the skyes,
That molten starres do drop like weeping eyes;
And Phoebus flying so most shamefull sight,
His blushing face in foggy cloud implyes,
And hides for shame. What wit of mortall wight
Can now deuise to quit a thrall from such a plight?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Eternall prouidence exceeding thought,
Where none appeares can make her selfe a way:
A wondrous way it for this Lady wrought,
From Lyons clawes to pluck the griped pray.
Her shrill outcryes and shriekes so loud did bray,
That all the woodes and forestes did resownd;
A troupe of Faunes and Satyres far away
Within the wood were dauncing in a rownd,
Whiles old Syluanus slept in shady arber sownd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who when they heard that pitteous strained voice,
In hast forsooke their rurall meriment,
And ran towards the far rebownded noyce,
To weet, what wight so loudly did lament.
Vnto the place they come incontinent:
Whom when the raging Sarazin espide,
A rude, misshapen, monstrous rablement,
Whose like he neuer saw, he durst not bide,
But got his ready steed, and fast away gan ride.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The wyld woodgods arriued in the place,
There find the virgin dolefull desolate,
With ruffled rayments, and faire blubbred face,
As her outrageous foe had left her late,
And trembling yet through feare of former hate;
All stand amazed at so vncouth sight,
And gin to pittie her vnhappie state,
All stand astonied at her beautie bright,
In their rude eyes vnworthie of so wofull plight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She more amaz'd, in double dread doth dwell;
And euery tender part for feare does shake:
As when a greedie Wolfe through hunger fell
A seely Lambe farre from the flocke does take,
Of whom he meanes his bloudie feast to make,
A Lyon spyes fast running towards him,
The innocent pray in hast he does forsake,
Which quit from death yet quakes in euery lim
With chaunge of feare, to see the Lyon looke so grim.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Such fearefull fit assaid her trembling hart,
Ne word to speake, ne ioynt to moue she had:
The saluage nation feele her secret smart,
And read her sorrow in her count'nance sad;
Their frowning forheads with rough hornes yclad,
And rusticke horror all a side doe lay,
And gently grenning, shew a semblance glad
To comfort her, and feare to put away,
Their backward bent knees teach her humbly to obay.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The doubtfull Damzell dare not yet commit
Her single person to their barbarous truth,
But still twixt feare and hope amazd does sit,
Late learnd what harme to hastie trust ensu'th,
They in compassion of her tender youth,
And wonder of her beautie soueraine,
Are wonne with pitty and vnwonted ruth,
And all prostrate vpon the lowly plaine,
Do kisse her feete, and fawne on her with count'nance faine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Their harts she ghesseth by their humble guise,
And yieldes her to extremitie of time;
So from the ground she fearelesse doth arise,
And walketh forth without suspect of crime:
They all as glad, as birdes of ioyous Prime,
Thence lead her forth, about her dauncing round,
Shouting, and singing all a shepheards ryme,
And with greene braunches strowing all the ground,
Do worship her, as Queene, with oliue girlond cround.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And all the way their merry pipes they sound,
That all the woods with doubled Eccho ring,
And with their horned feet do weare the ground,
Leaping like wanton kids in pleasant Spring.
So towards old Syluanus they her bring;
Who with the noyse awaked, commeth out,
To weet the cause, his weake steps gouerning,
And aged limbs on Cypresse stadle stout,
And with an yuie twyne his wast is girt about.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Far off he wonders, what them makes so glad,
If Bacchus merry fruit they did inuent,
Or Cybeles franticke rites haue made them mad;
They drawing nigh, vnto their God present
That flowre of faith and beautie excellent.
The God himselfe vewing that mirrhour rare,
Stood long amazd, and burnt in his intent;
His owne faire Dryope now he thinkes not faire,
And Pholoe fowle, when her to this he doth compaire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The woodborne people fall before her flat,
And worship her as Goddesse of the wood;
And old Syluanus selfe bethinkes not, what
To thinke of wight so faire, but gazing stood,
In doubt to deeme her borne of earthly brood;
Sometimes Dame Venus selfe he seemes to see,
But Venus neuer had so sober mood;
Sometimes Diana he her takes to bee,
But misseth bow, and shaftes, and buskins to her knee.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

By vew of her he ginneth to reuiue
His ancient loue, and dearest Cyparisse,
And calles to mind his pourtraiture aliue,
How faire he was, and yet not faire to this,
And how he slew with glauncing dart amisse
A gentle Hynd, the which the louely boy
Did loue as life, aboue all worldly blisse;
For griefe whereof the lad n'ould after ioy,
But pynd away in anguish and selfe-wild annoy.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The wooddy Nymphes, faire Hamadryades
Her to behold do thither runne apace,
And all the troupe of light-foot Naiades,
Flocke all about to see her louely face:
But when they vewed haue her heauenly grace,
They enuie her in their malitious mind,
And fly away for feare of fowle disgrace:
But all the Satyres scorne their woody kind,
And henceforth nothing faire, but her on earth they find.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Glad of such lucke, the luckelesse lucky maid,
Did her content to please their feeble eyes,
And long time with that saluage people staid,
To gather breath in many miseries.
During which time her gentle wit she plyes,
To teach them truth, which worshipt her in vaine,
And made her th'Image of Idolatryes;
But when their bootlesse zeale she did restraine
Frõ her own worship, they her Asse would worship fayn.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

It fortuned a noble warlike knight
By iust occasion to that forrest came,
To seeke his kindred, and the lignage right,
From whence he tooke his well deserued name:
He had in armes abroad wonne muchell fame,
And fild far landes with glorie of his might,
Plaine, faithfull, true, and enimy of shame,
And euer lou'd to fight for Ladies right,
But in vaine glorious frayes he litle did delight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A Satyres sonne yborne in forrest wyld,
By straunge aduenture as it did betyde,
And there begotten of a Lady myld,
Faire Thyamis the daughter of Labryde,
That was in sacred bands of wedlocke tyde
To Therion, a loose vnruly swayne;
Who had more ioy to raunge the forrest wyde,
And chase the saluage beast with busie payne,
Then serue his Ladies loue, and wast in pleasures vayne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The forlorne mayd did with loues longing burne,
And could not lacke her louers company,
But to the wood she goes, to serue her turne,
And seeke her spouse, that from her still does fly,
And followes other game and venery:
A Satyre chaunst her wandring for to find,
And kindling coles of lust in brutish eye,
The loyall links of wedlocke did vnbind,
And made her person thrall vnto his beastly kind.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So long in secret cabin there he held
Her captiue to his sensuall desire,
Till that with timely fruit her belly sweld,
And bore a boy vnto that saluage sire:
Then home he suffred her for to retire,
For ransome leauing him the late borne childe;
Whom till to ryper yeares he gan aspire,
He noursled vp in life and manners wilde,
Emongst wild beasts and woods, from lawes of men exilde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For all he taught the tender ymp, was but
To banish cowardize and bastard feare;
His trembling hand he would him force to put
Vpon the Lyon and the rugged Beare,
And from the she Beares teats her whelps to teare;
And eke wyld roring Buls he would him make
To tame, and ryde their backes not made to beare;
And the Robuckes in flight to ouertake,
That euery beast for feare of him did fly and quake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thereby so fearelesse, and so fell he grew,
That his owne sire and maister of his guise
Did often tremble at his horrid vew,
And oft for dread of hurt would him aduise,
The angry beasts not rashly to despise,
Nor too much to prouoke; for he would learne
The Lyon stoup to him in lowly wise,
(A lesson hard) and make the Libbard sterne
Leaue roaring, when in rage he for reuenge did earne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And for to make his powre approued more,
Wyld beasts in yron yokes he would compell;
The spotted Panther, and the tusked Bore,
The Pardale swift, and the Tigre cruell;
The Antelope, and Wolfe both fierce and fell;
And them constraine in equall teme to draw.
Such ioy he had, their stubborne harts to quell,
And sturdie courage tame with dreadfull aw,
That his beheast they feared, as tyrans law,

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His louing mother came vpon a day
Vnto the woods, to see her little sonne;
And chaunst vnwares to meet him in the way,
After his sportes, and cruell pastime donne,
When after him a Lyonesse did runne,
That roaring all with rage, did lowd requere
Her children deare, whom he away had wonne:
The Lyon whelpes she saw how he did beare,
And lull in rugged armes, withouten childish feare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The fearefull Dame all quaked at the sight,
And turning backe, gan fast to fly away,
Vntill with loue reuokt from vaine affright,
She hardly yet perswaded was to stay,
And then to him these womanish words gan say;
Ah Satyrane, my dearling, and my ioy,
For loue of me leaue off this dreadfull play;
To dally thus with death, is no fit toy,
Go find some other play-fellowes, mine own sweet boy.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In these and like delights of bloudy game
He trayned was, till ryper yeares he raught,
And there abode, whilst any beast of name
Walkt in that forest, whom he had not taught
To feare his force: and then his courage haught
Desird of forreine foemen to be knowne,
And far abroad for straunge aduentures sought:
In which his might was neuer ouerthrowne,
But through all Faery lond his famous worth was blown.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Yet euermore it was his manner faire,
After long labours and aduentures spent,
Vnto those natiue woods for to repaire,
To see his sire and offspring auncient.
And now he thither came for like intent;
Where he vnwares the fairest Vna found,
Straunge Lady, in so straunge habiliment,
Teaching the Satyres, which her sat around,
Trew sacred lore, which from her sweet lips did redound.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He wondred at her wisedome heauenly rare,
Whose like in womens wit he neuer knew;
And when her curteous deeds he did compare,
Gan her admire, and her sad sorrowes rew,
Blaming of Fortune, which such troubles threw,
And ioyd to make proofe of her crueltie
On gentle Dame, so hurtlesse, and so trew:
Thenceforth he kept her goodly company,
And learnd her discipline of faith and veritie.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But she all vowd vnto the Redcrosse knight,
His wandring perill closely did lament,
Ne in this new acquaintaunce could delight,
But her deare heart with anguish did torment,
And all her wit in secret counsels spent,
How to escape. At last in priuie wise
To Satyrane she shewed her intent:
Who glad to gain such fauour, gan deuise,
How with that pensiue Maid he best might thence arise.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So on a day when Satyres all were gone,
To do their seruice to Syluanus old,
The gentle virgin left behind alone
He led away with courage stout and bold.
Too late it was, to Satyres to be told,
Or euer hope recouer her againe:
In vaine he seekes that hauing cannot hold.
So fast he carried her with carefull paine,
That they the woods are past, & come now to the plaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The better part now of the lingring day,
They traueild had, when as they farre espide
A wearie wight forwandring by the way,
And towards him they gan in hast to ride,
To weet of newes, that did abroad betide,
Or tydings of her knight of the Redcrosse.
But he them spying, gan to turne aside,
For feare as seemd, or for some feigned losse;
More greedy they of newes, fast towards him do crosse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A silly man, in simple weedes forworne,
And soild with dust of the long dried way;
His sandales were with toilesome trauell torne,
And face all tand with scorching sunny ray,
As he had traueild many a sommers day,
Through boyling sands of Arabie and Ynde;
And in his hand a Iacobs staffe, to stay
His wearie limbes vpon: and eke behind,
His scrip did hang, in which his needments he did bind.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight approching nigh, of him inquerd
Tydings of warre, and of aduentures new;
But warres, nor new aduentures none he herd.
Then Vna gan to aske, if ought he knew,
Or heard abroad of that her champion trew,
That in his armour bare a croslet red.
Aye me, Deare dame (quoth he) well may I rew
To tell the sad sight, which mine eies haue red:
These eyes did see that knight both liuing and eke ded.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

That cruell word her tender hart so thrild,
That suddein cold did runne through euery vaine,
And stony horrour all her sences fild
With dying fit, that downe she fell for paine.
The knight her lightly reared vp againe,
And comforted with curteous kind reliefe:
Then wonne from death, she bad him tellen plaine
The further processe of her hidden griefe;
The lesser pangs can beare, who hath endur'd the chiefe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then gan the Pilgrim thus, I chaunst this day,
This fatall day, that shall I euer rew,
To see two knights in trauell on my way
(A sory sight) arraung'd in battell new,
Both breathing vengeaunce, both of wrathfull hew:
My fearefull flesh did tremble at their strife,
To see their blades so greedily imbrew,
That drunke with bloud, yet thristed after life:
What more? the Redcrosse knight was slaine with Paynim knife.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ah dearest Lord (quoth she) how might that bee,
And he the stoutest knight, that euer wonne?
Ah dearest dame (quoth he) how might I see
The thing, that might not be, and yet was donne?
Where is (said Satyrane) that Paynims sonne,
That him of life, and vs of ioy hath reft?
Not far away (quoth he) he hence doth wonne
Foreby a fountaine, where I late him left
Washing his bloudy wounds, that through the steele were cleft.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith the knight thence marched forth in hast,
Whiles Vna with huge heauinesse opprest,
Could not for sorrow follow him so fast;
And soone he came, as he the place had ghest,
Whereas that Pagan proud him selfe did rest,
In secret shadow by a fountaine side:
Euen he it was, that earst would haue supprest
Faire Vna: whom when Satyrane espide,
With fowle reprochfull words he boldly him defide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And said, Arise thou cursed Miscreaunt,
That hast with knightlesse guile and trecherous train
Faire knighthood fowly shamed, and doest vaunt
That good knight of the Redcrosse to haue slain:
Arise, and with like treason now maintain
Thy guilty wrong, or else thee guilty yield.
The Sarazin this hearing, rose amain,
And catching vp in hast his three square shield,
And shining helmet, soone him buckled to the field.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And drawing nigh him said, Ah misborne Elfe,
In euill houre thy foes thee hither sent,
Anothers wrongs to wreake vpon thy selfe:
Yet ill thou blamest me, for hauing blent
My name with guile and traiterous intent;
That Redcrosse knight, perdie, I neuer slew,
But had he beene, where earst his armes were lent,
Th'enchaunter vaine his errour should not rew:
But thou his errour shalt, I hope now prouen trew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith they gan, both furious and fell,
To thunder blowes, and fiersly to assaile
Each other bent his enimy to quell,
That with their force they perst both plate and maile,
And made wide furrowes in their fleshes fraile,
That it would pitty any liuing eie.
Large floods of bloud adowne their sides did raile;
But floods of bloud could not them satisfie:
Both hungred after death: both chose to win, or die.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So long they fight, and fell reuenge pursue,
That fainting each, themselues to breathen let,
And oft refreshed, battell oft renue:
As when two Bores with rancling malice met,
Their gory sides fresh bleeding fiercely fret,
Til breathlesse both them selues aside retire,
Where foming wrath, their cruell tuskes they whet,
And trample th'earth, the whiles they may respire;
Then backe to fight againe, new breathed and entire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So fiersly, when these knights had breathed once,
They gan to fight returne, increasing more
Their puissant force, and cruell rage attonce,
With heaped strokes more hugely, then before,
That with their drerie wounds and bloudy gore
They both deformed, scarsely could be known.
By this sad Vna fraught with anguish sore,
Led with their noise, which through the aire was thrown:
Arriu'd, where they in erth their fruitles bloud had sown.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whom all so soone as that proud Sarazin
Espide, he gan reuiue the memory
Of his lewd lusts, and late attempted sin,
And left the doubtfull battell hastily,
To catch her, newly offred to his eie:
But Satyrane with strokes him turning, staid,
And sternely bad him other businesse plie,
Then hunt the steps of pure vnspotted Maid:
Wherewith he all enrag'd, these bitter speaches said.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O foolish faeries sonne, what furie mad
Hath thee incenst, to hast thy dolefull fate?
Were it not better, I that Lady had,
Then that thou hadst repented it too late?
Most sencelesse man he, that himselfe doth hate,
To loue another. Lo then for thine ayd
Here take thy louers token on thy pate.
So they to fight; the whiles the royall Mayd
Fled farre away, of that proud Paynim sore afrayd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But that false Pilgrim, which that leasing told,
Being in deed old Archimage, did stay
In secret shadow, all this to behold,
And much reioyced in their bloudy fray:
But when he saw the Damsell passe away
He left his stond, and her pursewd apace,
In hope to bring her to her last decay.
But for to tell her lamentable cace,
And eke this battels end, will need another place.

TITLE Faerie Queene VII

RHYME a b a b

The Redcrosse knight is captiue made
By Gyaunt proud opprest,
Prince Arthur meets with Vna great-
ly with those newes distrest.

RHYME a b a b b c b

WHat man so wise, what earthly wit so ware,
As to descry the crafty cunning traine,
By which deceipt doth maske in visour faire,
And cast her colours dyed deepe in graine,
To seeme like Truth, whose shape she well can faine,
And fitting gestures to her purpose frame;
The guiltlesse man with guile to entertaine?

RHYME a a b c b c c d c d d

Great maistresse of her art was that false Dame,
The false Duessa, cloked with Fidessaes name.
Who when returning from the drery Night,
She fownd not in that perilous house of Pryde,
Where she had left, the noble Redcrosse knight,
Her hoped pray, she would no lenger bide,
But forth she went, to seeke him far and wide.
Ere long she fownd, whereas he wearie sate,
To rest him selfe, foreby a fountaine side,
Disarmed all of yron-coted Plate,
And by his side his steed the grassy forage ate.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He feedes vpon the cooling shade, and bayes
His sweatie forehead in the breathing wind,
Which through the trẽbling leaues full gently playes
Wherein the cherefull birds of sundry kind
Do chaunt sweet musick, to delight his mind:
The Witch approching gan him fairely greet,
And with reproch of carelesnesse vnkind
Vpbrayd, for leauing her in place vnmeet,
With fowle words tempring faire, soure gall with hony sweet.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vnkindnesse past, they gan of solace treat,
And bathe in pleasaunce of the ioyous shade,
Which shielded them against the boyling heat,
And with greene boughes decking a gloomy glade,
About the fountaine like a girlond made;
Whose bubbling waue did euer freshly well,
Ne euer would through feruent sommer fade:
The sacred Nymph, which therein wont to dwell,
Was out of Dianes fauour, as it then befell.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The cause was this: one day when Phoebe fayre
With all her band was following the chace,
This Nymph, quite tyr'd with heat of scorching ayre,
Sat downe to rest in middest of the race:
The goddesse wroth gan fowly her disgrace,
And bad the waters, which from her did flow,
Be such as she her selfe was then in place.
Thenceforth her waters waxed dull and slow,
And all that drunke thereof, did faint and feeble grow.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Hereof this gentle knight vnweeting was,
And lying downe vpon the sandie graile,
Drunke of the streame, as cleare as cristall glas;
Eftsoones his manly forces gan to faile,
And mightie strong was turnd to feeble fraile.
His chaunged powres at first them selues not felt,
Till crudled cold his corage gan assaile,
And chearefull bloud in faintnesse chill did melt,
Which like a feuer fit through all his body swelt.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Yet goodly court he made still to his Dame,
Pourd out in loosnesse on the grassy grownd,
Both carelesse of his health, and of his fame:
Till at the last he heard a dreadfull sownd,
Which through the wood loud bellowing, did rebownd,
That all the earth for terrour seemd to shake,
And trees did tremble. Th'Elfe therewith astownd,
Vpstarted lightly from his looser make,
And his vnready weapons gan in hand to take.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But ere he could his armour on him dight,
Or get his shield, his monstrous enimy
With sturdie steps came stalking in his sight,
An hideous Geant horrible and hye,
That with his talnesse seemd to threat the skye,
The ground eke groned vnder him for dreed;
His liuing like saw neuer liuing eye,
Ne durst behold: his stature did exceed
The hight of three the tallest sonnes of mortall seed.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The greatest Earth his vncouth mother was,
And blustring AEolus his boasted sire, 
Who with his breath, which through the world doth pas,
Her hollow womb did secretly inspire,
And fild her hidden caues with stormie yre,
That she conceiu'd; and trebling the dew time,
In which the wombes of women do expire,
Brought forth this monstrous masse of earthly slime,
Puft vp with emptie wind, and fild with sinfull crime.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So growen great through arrogant delight
Of th'high descent, whereof he was yborne,
And through presumption of his matchlesse might,
All other powres and knighthood he did scorne.
Such now he marcheth to this man forlorne,
And left to losse: his stalking steps are stayde
Vpon a snaggy Oke, which he had torne
Out of his mothers bowelles, and it made
His mortall mace, wherewith his foemen he dismayde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

That when the knight he spide, he gan aduance
With huge force and insupportable mayne,
And towardes him with dreadfull fury praunce;
Who haplesse, and eke hopelesse, all in vaine
Did to him pace, sad battaile to darrayne,
Disarmd, disgrast, and inwardly dismayde,
And eke so faint in euery ioynt and vaine,
Through that fraile fountaine, which him feeble made,
That scarsely could he weeld his bootlesse single blade.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Geaunt strooke so maynly mercilesse,
That could haue ouerthrowne a stony towre,
And were not heauenly grace, that him did blesse,
He had beene pouldred all, as thin as flowre:
But he was wary of that deadly stowre,
And lightly lept from vnderneath the blow:
Yet so exceeding was the villeins powre,
That with the wind it did him ouerthrow,
And all his sences stound, that still he lay full low.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

As when that diuelish yron Engin wrought
In deepest Hell, and framd by Furies skill,
With windy Nitre and quick Sulphur fraught,
And ramd with bullet round, ordaind to kill,
Conceiueth fire, the heauens it doth fill
With thundring noyse, and all the ayre doth choke,
That none can breath, nor see, nor heare at will,
Through smouldry cloud of duskish stincking smoke,
That th'onely breath him daunts, who hath escapt the stroke.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So daunted when the Geaunt saw the knight,
His heauie hand he heaued vp on hye,
And him to dust thought to haue battred quight,
Vntill Duessa loud to him gan crye;
O great Orgoglio, greatest vnder skye,
O hold thy mortall hand for Ladies sake,
Hold for my sake, and do him not to dye,
But vanquisht thine eternall bondslaue make,
And me thy worthy meed vnto thy Leman take.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He hearkned, and did stay from further harmes,
To gayne so goodly guerdon, as she spake:
So willingly she came into his armes,
Who her as willingly to grace did take,
And was possessed of his new found make.
Then vp he tooke the slombred sencelesse corse,
And ere he could out of his swowne awake,
Him to his castle brought with hastie forse,
And in a Dongeon deepe him threw without remorse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

From that day forth Duessa was his deare,
And highly honourd in his haughtie eye,
He gaue her gold and purple pall to weare,
And triple crowne set on her head full hye,
And her endowd with royall maiestye:
Then for to make her dreaded more of men,
And peoples harts with awfull terrour tye,
A monstrous beast ybred in filthy fen
He chose, which he had kept long time in darksome den.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Such one it was, as that renowmed Snake
Which great Alcides in Stremona slew,
Long fostred in the filth of Lerna lake,
Whose many heads out budding euer new,
Did breed him endlesse labour to subdew:
But this same Monster much more vgly was;
For seuen great heads out of his body grew,
An yron brest, and backe of scaly bras,
And all embrewd in bloud, his eyes did shine as glas.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His tayle was stretched out in wondrous length,
That to the house of heauenly gods it raught,
And with extorted powre, and borrow'd strength,
The euer-burning lamps from thence it braught,
And prowdly threw to ground, as things of naught;
And vnderneath his filthy feet did tread
The sacred things, and holy heasts foretaught.
Vpon this dreadfull Beast with seuenfold head
He set the false Duessa, for more aw and dread.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The wofull Dwarfe, which saw his maisters fall,
Whiles he had keeping of his grasing steed,
And valiant knight become a caytiue thrall,
When all was past, tooke vp his forlorne weed,
His mightie armour, missing most at need;
His siluer shield, now idle maisterlesse;
His poynant speare, that many made to bleed,
The ruefull moniments of heauinesse,
And with them all departes, to tell his great distresse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He had not trauaild long, when on the way
He wofull Ladie, wofull Vna met,
Fast flying from the Paynims greedy pray,
Whilest Satyrane him from pursuit did let:
Who when her eyes she on the Dwarf had set,
And saw the signes, that deadly tydings spake,
She fell to ground for sorrowfull regret,
And liuely breath her sad brest did forsake,
Yet might her pitteous hart be seene to pant and quake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The messenger of so vnhappie newes
Would faine haue dyde: dead was his hart within,
Yet outwardly some little comfort shewes:
At last recouering hart, he does begin
To rub her temples, and to chaufe her chin,
And euery tender part does tosse and turne:
So hardly he the flitted life does win,
Vnto her natiue prison to retourne:
Then gins her grieued ghost thus to lament and mourne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ye dreary instruments of dolefull sight,
That doe this deadly spectacle behold,
Why do ye lenger feed on loathed light,
Or liking find to gaze on earthly mould,
Sith cruell fates the carefull threeds vnfould,
The which my life and loue together tyde?
Now let the stony dart of senselesse cold
Perce to my hart, and pas through euery side,
And let eternall night so sad [sight] fro me hide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O lightsome day, the lampe of highest Ioue,
First made by him, mens wandring wayes to guyde,
When darknesse he in deepest dongeon droue,
Henceforth thy hated face for euer hyde,
And shut vp heauens windowes shyning wyde:
For earthly sight can nought but sorow breed,
And late repentance, which shall long abyde.
Mine eyes no more on vanitie shall feed,
But seeled vp with death, shall haue their deadly meed.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then downe againe she fell vnto the ground;
But he her quickly reared vp againe:
Thrise did she sinke adowne in deadly swownd,
And thrise he her reviu'd with busie paine:
At last when life recouer'd had the raine,
And ouer-wrestled his strong enemie,
With foltring tong, and trembling euery vaine,
Tell on (quoth she) the wofull Tragedie,
The which these reliques sad present vnto mine eie.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Tempestuous fortune hath spent all her spight,
And thrilling sorrow throwne his vtmost dart;
Thy sad tongue cannot tell more heauy plight,
Then that I feele, and harbour in mine hart:
Who hath endur'd the whole, can beare each part.
If death it be, it is not the first wound,
That launched hath my brest with bleeding smart.
Begin, and end the bitter balefull stound;
If lesse, then that I feare, more fauour I haue found.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then gan the Dwarfe the whole discourse declare,
The subtill traines of Archimago old;
The wanton loues of false Fidessa faire,
Bought with the bloud of vanquisht Paynim bold:
The wretched payre transform'd to treen mould;
The house of Pride, and perils round about;
The combat, which he with Sansioy did hould;
The lucklesse conflict with the Gyant stout,
Wherein captiu'd, of life or death he stood in doubt.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She heard with patience all vnto the end,
And stroue to maister sorrowfull assay,
Which greater grew, the more she did contend,
And almost rent her tender hart in tway;
And loue fresh coles vnto her fire did lay:
For greater loue, the greater is the losse.
Was neuer Ladie loued dearer day,
Then she did loue the knight of the Redcrosse;
For whose deare sake so many troubles her did tosse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last when feruent sorrow slaked was,
She vp arose, resoluing him to find
A liue or dead: and forward forth doth pas,
All as the Dwarfe the way to her assynd:
And euermore in constant carefull mind
She fed her wound with fresh renewed bale;
Long tost with stormes, and bet with bitter wind,
High ouer hils, and low adowne the dale,
She wandred many a wood, and measurd many a vale.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last she chaunced by good hap to meet
A goodly knight, faire marching by the way
Together with his Squire, arayed meet:
His glitterand armour shined farre away,
Like glauncing light of Phoebus brightest ray;
From top to toe no place appeared bare,
That deadly dint of steele endanger may:
Athwart his brest a bauldrick braue he ware,
That shynd, like twinkling stars, with stons most pretious rare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And in the midst thereof one pretious stone
Of wondrous worth, and eke of wondrous mights,
Shapt like a Ladies head, exceeding shone,
Like Hesperus emongst the lesser lights,
And stroue for to amaze the weaker sights;
Thereby his mortall blade full comely hong
In yuory sheath, ycaru'd with curious slights;
Whose hilts were burnisht gold, and handle strong
Of mother pearle, and buckled with a golden tong.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His haughtie helmet, horrid all with gold,
Both glorious brightnesse, and great terrour bred;
For all the crest a Dragon did enfold
With greedie pawes, and ouer all did spred
His golden wings: his dreadfull hideous hed
Close couched on the beuer, seem'd to throw
From flaming mouth bright sparkles fierie red,
That suddeine horror to faint harts did show;
And scaly tayle was stretcht adowne his backe full low.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vpon the top of all his loftie crest,
A bunch of haires discolourd diuersly,
With sprincled pearle, and gold full richly drest,
Did shake, and seem'd to daunce for iollity,
Like to an Almond tree ymounted hye
On top of greene Selinis all alone,
With blossomes braue bedecked daintily;
Whose tender locks do tremble euery one
At euery little breath, that vnder heauen is blowne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His warlike shield all closely couer'd was,
Ne might of mortall eye be euer seene;
Not made of steele, nor of enduring bras,
Such earthly mettals soone consumed bene:
But all of Diamond perfect pure and cleene
It framed was, one massie entire mould,
Hewen out of Adamant rocke with engines keene,
That point of speare it neuer percen could,
Ne dint of direfull sword diuide the substance would.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The same to wight he neuer wont disclose,
But when as monsters huge he would dismay,
Or daunt vnequall armies of his foes,
Or when the flying heauens he would affray;
For so exceeding shone his glistring ray,
That Phoebus golden face it did attaint,
As when a cloud his beames doth ouer-lay;
And siluer Cynthia wexed pale and faint,
As when her face is staynd with magicke arts constraint.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

No magicke arts hereof had any might,
Nor bloudie wordes of bold Enchaunters call,
But all that was not such, as seemd in sight,
Before that shield did fade, and suddeine fall:
And when him list the raskall routes appall,
Men into stones therewith he could transmew,
And stones to dust, and dust to nought at all;
And when him list the prouder lookes subdew,
He would them gazing blind, or turne to other hew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ne let it seeme, that credence this exceedes,
For he that made the same, was knowne right well
To haue done much more admirable deedes.
It Merlin was, which whylome did excell
All liuing wightes in might of magicke spell:
Both shield, and sword, and armour all he wrought
For this young Prince, when first to armes he fell;
But when he dyde, the Faerie Queene it brought
To Faerie lond, where yet it may be seene, if sought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A gentle youth, his dearely loued Squire
His speare of heben wood behind him bare,
Whose harmefull head, thrice heated in the fire,
Had riuen many a brest with pikehead square;
A goodly person, and could menage faire
His stubborne steed with curbed canon bit,
Who vnder him did trample as the aire,
And chauft, that any on his backe should sit;
The yron rowels into frothy fome he bit.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

When as this knight nigh to the Ladie drew,
With louely court he gan her entertaine;
But when he heard her answeres loth, he knew
Some secret sorrow did her heart distraine:
Which to allay, and calme her storming paine,
Faire feeling words he wisely gan display,
And for her humour fitting purpose faine,
To tempt the cause it selfe for to bewray;
Wherewith emmou'd, these bleeding words she gan to say.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

What worlds delight, or ioy of liuing speach
Can heart, so plung'd in sea of sorrowes deepe,
And heaped with so huge misfortunes, reach?
The carefull cold beginneth for to creepe,
And in my heart his yron arrow steepe,
Soone as I thinke vpon my bitter bale:
Such helplesse harmes yts better hidden keepe,
Then rip vp griefe, where it may not auaile,
My last left comfort is, my woes to weepe and waile.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ah Ladie deare, quoth then the gentle knight,
Well may I weene, your griefe is wondrous great;
For wondrous great griefe groneth in my spright,
Whiles thus I heare you of your sorrowes treat.
But wofull Ladie let me you intrete,
For to vnfold the anguish of your hart:
Mishaps are maistred by aduice discrete,
And counsell mittigates the greatest smart;
Found neuer helpe, who neuer would his hurts impart.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O but (quoth she) great griefe will not be tould,
And can more easily be thought, then said.
Right so; (quoth he) but he, that neuer would,
Could neuer: will to might giues greatest aid.
But griefe (quoth she) does greater grow displaid,
If then it find not helpe, and breedes despaire.
Despaire breedes not (quoth he) where faith is staid.
No faith so fast (quoth she) but flesh does paire.
Flesh may empaire (quoth he) but reason can repaire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His goodly reason, and well guided speach
So deepe did settle in her gratious thought,
That her perswaded to disclose the breach,
Which loue and fortune in her heart had wrought,
And said; faire Sir, I hope good hap hath brought
You to inquere the secrets of my griefe,
Or that your wisedome will direct my thought,
Or that your prowesse can me yield reliefe:
Then heare the storie sad, which I shall tell you briefe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The forlorne Maiden, whom your eyes haue seene
The laughing stocke of fortunes mockeries,
Am th'only daughter of a King and Queene,
Whose parents deare, whilest equall destinies
Did runne about, and their felicities
The fauourable heauens did not enuy,
Did spread their rule through all the territories,
Which Phison and Euphrates floweth by,
And Gehons golden waues doe wash continually.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Till that their cruell cursed enemy,
An huge great Dragon horrible in sight,
Bred in the loathly lakes of Tartary,
With murdrous rauine, and deuouring might
Their kingdome spoild, and countrey wasted quight:
Themselues, for feare into his iawes to fall,
He forst to castle strong to take their flight,
Where fast embard in mightie brasen wall,
He has them now foure yeres besiegd to make thẽ thrall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Full many knights aduenturous and stout
Haue enterprizd that Monster to subdew;
From euery coast that heauen walks about,
Haue thither come the noble Martiall crew,
That famous hard atchieuements still pursew,
Yet neuer any could that girlond win,
But all still shronke, and still he greater grew:
All they for want of faith, or guilt of sin,
The pitteous pray of his fierce crueltie haue bin.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last yledd with farre reported praise,
Which flying fame throughout the world had spred,
Of doughtie knights, whom Faery land did raise,
That noble order hight of Maidenhed,
Forthwith to court of Gloriane I sped,
Of Gloriane great Queene of glory bright,
Whose kingdomes seat Cleopolis is red,
There to obtaine some such redoubted knight,
That Parents deare from tyrants powre deliuer might.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

It was my chance (my chance was faire and good)
There for to find a fresh vnproued knight,
Whose manly hands imbrew'd in guiltie blood
Had neuer bene, ne euer by his might
Had throwne to ground the vnregarded right:
Yet of his prowesse proofe he since hath made
(I witnesse am) in many a cruell fight;
The groning ghosts of many one dismaide
Haue felt the bitter dint of his auenging blade.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And ye the forlorne reliques of his powre,
His byting sword, and his deuouring speare,
Which haue endured many a dreadfull stowre,
Can speake his prowesse, that did earst you beare,
And well could rule: now he hath left you heare,
To be the record of his ruefull losse,
And of my dolefull disauenturous deare:
O heauie record of the good Redcrosse,
Where haue you left your Lord, that could so well you tosse?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Well hoped I, and faire beginnings had,
That he my captiue langour should redeeme,
Till all vnweeting, an Enchaunter bad
His sence abusd, and made him to misdeeme
My loyalty, not such as it did seeme;
That rather death desire, then such despight.
Be iudge ye heauens, that all things right esteeme,
How I him lou'd, and loue with all my might,
So thought I eke of him, and thinke I thought aright.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thenceforth me desolate he quite forsooke,
To wander, where wilde fortune would me lead,
And other bywaies he himselfe betooke,
Where neuer foot of liuing wight did tread,
That brought not backe the balefull body dead;
In which him chaunced false Duessa meete,
Mine onely foe, mine onely deadly dread,
Who with her witchcraft and misseeming sweete,
Inueigled him to follow her desires vnmeete.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last by subtill sleights she him betraid
Vnto his foe, a Gyant huge and tall,
Who him disarmed, dissolute, dismaid,
Vnwares surprised, and with mightie mall
The monster mercilesse him made to fall,
Whose fall did neuer foe before behold;
And now in darkesome dungeon, wretched thrall,
Remedilesse, for aie he doth him hold;
This is my cause of griefe, more great, then may be told.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ere she had ended all, she gan to faint:
But he her comforted and faire bespake,
Certes, Madame, ye haue great cause of plaint,
That stoutest heart, I weene, could cause to quake.
But be of cheare, and comfort to you take:
For till I haue acquit your captiue knight,
Assure your selfe, I will you not forsake.
His chearefull words reuiu'd her chearelesse spright,
So forth they went, the Dwarfe them guiding euer right.

TITLE Faerie Queene VIII

RHYME a b a b

Faire virgin to redeeme her deare
brings Arthur to the fight,
Who slayes the Gyant, wounds the beast,
and strips Duessa quight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

AY me, how many perils doe enfold
The righteous man, to make him daily fall?
Were not, that heauenly grace doth him vphold,
And stedfast truth acquite him out of all.
Her loue is firme, her care continuall,
So oft as he through his owne foolish pride,
Or weaknesse is to sinfull bands made thrall:
Else should this Redcrosse knight in bands haue dyde,
For whose deliuerãce she this Prince doth thither guide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

They sadly traueild thus, vntill they came
Nigh to a castle builded strong and hie:
Then cryde the Dwarfe, lo yonder is the same,
In which my Lord my liege doth lucklesse lie,
Thrall to that Gyants hatefull tyrannie:
Therefore, deare Sir, your mightie powres assay.
The noble knight alighted by and by
From loftie steede, and bad the Ladie stay,
To see what end of fight should him befall that day.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So with the Squire, th'admirer of his might,
He marched forth towards that castle wall;
Whose gates he found fast shut, ne liuing wight
To ward the same, nor answere commers call.
Then tooke that Squire an horne of bugle small,
Which hong adowne his side in twisted gold,
And tassels gay. Wyde wonders ouer all
Of that same hornes great vertues weren told,
Which had approued bene in vses manifold.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Was neuer wight, that heard that shrilling sound,
But trembling feare did feele in euery vaine;
Three miles it might be easie heard around,
And Ecchoes three answerd it selfe againe:
No false enchauntment, nor deceiptfull traine
Might once abide the terror of that blast,
But presently was voide and wholly vaine:
No gate so strong, no locke so firme and fast,
But with that percing noise flew open quite, or brast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The same before the Geants gate he blew,
That all the castle quaked from the ground,
And euery dore of freewill open flew.
The Gyant selfe dismaied with that sownd,
Where he with his Duessa dalliance fownd,
In hast came rushing forth from inner bowre,
With staring countenance sterne, as one astownd,
And staggering steps, to weet, what suddein stowre
Had wrought that horror strange, and dar'd his dreaded powre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And after him the proud Duessa came,
High mounted on her manyheaded beast,
And euery head with fyrie tongue did flame,
And euery head was crowned on his creast,
And bloudie mouthed with late cruell feast.
That when the knight beheld, his mightie shild
Vpon his manly arme he soone addrest,
And at him fiercely flew, with courage fild,
And eger greedinesse through euery member thrild.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith the Gyant buckled him to fight,
Inflam'd with scornefull wrath and high disdaine,
And lifting vp his dreadfull club on hight,
All arm'd with ragged snubbes and knottie graine,
Him thought at first encounter to haue slaine,
But wise and warie was that noble Pere,
And lightly leaping from so monstrous maine,
Did faire auoide the violence him nere;
It booted nought, to thinke, such thunderbolts to beare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ne shame he thought to shunne so hideous might:
The idle stroke, enforcing furious way,
Missing the marke of his misaymed sight
Did fall to ground, and with his heauie sway
So deepely dinted in the driuen clay,
That three yardes deepe a furrow vp did throw:
The sad earth wounded with so sore assay,
Did grone full grieuous vnderneath the blow,
And trembling with strange feare, did like an earthquake show.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

As when almightie Ioue in wrathfull mood,
To wreake the guilt of mortall sins is bent,
Hurles forth his thundring dart with deadly food,
Enrold in flames, and smouldring dreriment,
Through riuen cloudes and molten firmament;
The fierce threeforked engin making way,
Both loftie towres and highest trees hath rent,
And all that might his angrie passage stay,
And shooting in the earth, casts vp a mount of clay.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His boystrous club, so buried in the ground,
He could not rearen vp againe so light,
But that the knight him at auantage found,
And whiles he stroue his combred clubbe to quight
Out of the earth, with blade all burning bright
He smote off his left arme, which like a blocke
Did fall to ground, depriu'd of natiue might;
Large streames of bloud out of the truncked stocke
Forth gushed, like fresh water streame from riuen rocke.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Dismaied with so desperate deadly wound,
And eke impatient of vnwonted paine,
He loudly brayd with beastly yelling sound,
That all the fields rebellowed againe;
As great a noyse, as when in Cymbrian plaine
An heard of Bulles, whom kindly rage doth sting,
Do for the milkie mothers want complaine,
And fill the fields with troublous bellowing,
The neighbour woods around with hollow murmur ring.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

That when his deare Duessa heard, and saw
The euill stownd, that daungerd her estate,
Vnto his aide she hastily did draw
Her dreadfull beast, who swolne with bloud of late
Came ramping forth with proud presumpteous gate,
And threatned all his heads like flaming brands.
But him the Squire made quickly to retrate,
Encountring fierce with single sword in hand,
And twixt him and his Lord did like a bulwarke stand.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The proud Duessa full of wrathfull spight,
And fierce disdaine, to be affronted so,
Enforst her purple beast with all her might
That stop out of the way to ouerthroe,
Scorning the let of so vnequall foe:
But nathemore would that courageous swayne
To her yeeld passage, gainst his Lord to goe,
But with outrageous strokes did him restraine,
And with his bodie bard the way atwixt them twaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then tooke the angrie witch her golden cup,
Which still she bore, replete with magick artes;
Death and despeyre did many thereof sup,
And secret poyson through their inner parts,
Th'eternall bale of heauie wounded harts;
Which after charmes and some enchauntments said,
She lightly sprinkled on his weaker parts;
Therewith his sturdie courage soone was quayd,
And all his senses were with suddeine dread dismayd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So downe he fell before the cruell beast,
Who on his necke his bloudie clawes did seize,
That life nigh crusht out of his panting brest:
No powre he had to stirre, nor will to rize.
That when the carefull knight gan well auise,
He lightly left the foe, with whom he fought,
And to the beast gan turne his enterprise;
For wondrous anguish in his hart it wrought,
To see his loued Squire into such thraldome brought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And high aduauncing his bloud-thirstie blade,
Stroke one of those deformed heads so sore,
That of his puissance proud ensample made;
His monstrous scalpe downe to his teeth it tore,
And that misformed shape mis-shaped more:
A sea of bloud gusht from the gaping wound,
That her gay garments staynd with filthy gore,
And ouerflowed all the field around;
That ouer shoes in bloud he waded on the ground.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thereat he roared for exceeding paine,
That to haue heard, great horror would haue bred,
And scourging th'emptie ayre with his long traine,
Through great impatience of his grieued hed
His gorgeous ryder from her loftie sted
Would haue cast downe, and trod in durtie myre,
Had not the Gyant soone her succoured;
Who all enrag'd with smart and franticke yre,
Came hurtling in full fierce, and forst the knight retyre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The force, which wont in two to be disperst,
In one alone left hand he now vnites,
Which is through rage more strong then both were erst;
With which his hideous club aloft he dites,
And at his foe with furious rigour smites,
That strongest Oake might seeme to ouerthrow.
The stroke vpon his shield so heauie lites,
That to the ground it doubleth him full low
What mortall wight could euer beare so monstrous blow?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And in his fall his shield, that couered was,
Did loose his vele by chaunce, and open flew:
The light whereof, that heauens light did pas,
Such blazing brightnesse through the aier threw,
That eye mote not the same endure to vew.
Which when the Gyaunt spyde with staring eye,
He downe let fall his arme, and soft withdrew
His weapon huge, that heaued was on hye
For to haue slaine the man, that on the ground did lye.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And eke the fruitfull-headed beast, amaz'd
At flashing beames of that sunshiny shield,
Became starke blind, and all his senses daz'd,
That downe he tumbled on the durtie field,
And seem'd himselfe as conquered to yield.
Whom when his maistresse proud perceiu'd to fall,
Whiles yet his feeble feet for faintnesse reeld,
Vnto the Gyant loudly she gan call,
O helpe Orgoglio, helpe, or else we perish all.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At her so pitteous cry was much amoou'd
Her champion stout, and for to ayde his frend,
Againe his wonted angry weapon proou'd:
But all in vaine: for he has read his end
In that bright shield, and all their forces spend
Themselues in vaine: for since that glauncing sight,
He hath no powre to hurt, nor to defend;
As where th'Almighties lightning brond does light,
It dimmes the dazed eyen, and daunts the senses quight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whom when the Prince, to battell new addrest,
And threatning high his dreadfull stroke did see,
His sparkling blade about his head he blest,
And smote off quite his right leg by the knee,
That downe he tombled; as an aged tree,
High growing on the top of rocky clift,
Whose hartstrings with keene steele nigh hewen be,
The mightie trunck halfe rent, with ragged rift
Doth roll adowne the rocks, and fall with fearefull drift.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Or as a Castle reared high and round,
By subtile engins and malitious slight
Is vndermined from the lowest ground
And her foundation forst, and feebled quight,
At last downe falles, and with her heaped hight
Her hastie ruine does more heauie make,
And yields it selfe vnto the victours might;
Such was this Gyaunts fall, that seemd to shake
The stedfast globe of earth, as it for feare did quake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight then lightly leaping to the pray,
With mortall steele him smot againe so sore,
That headlesse his vnweldy bodie lay,
All wallowd in his owne fowle bloudy gore,
Which flowed from his wounds in wondrous store,
But soone as breath out of his breast did pas,
That huge great body, which the Gyaunt bore,
Was vanisht quite, and of that monstrous mas
Was nothing left, but like an emptie bladder was.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whose grieuous fall, when false Duessa spide,
Her golden cup she cast vnto the ground,
And crowned mitre rudely threw aside;
Such percing griefe her stubborne hart did wound,
That she could not endure that dolefull stound,
But leauing all behind her, fled away:
The light-foot Squire her quickly turnd around,
And by hard meanes enforcing her to stay,
So brought vnto his Lord, as his deserued pray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The royall Virgin, which beheld from farre,
In pensiue plight, and sad perplexitie,
The whole atchieuement of this doubtfull warre,
Came running fast to greet his victorie,
With sober gladnesse, and myld modestie,
And with sweet ioyous cheare him thus bespake;
Faire braunch of noblesse, flowre of cheualrie,
That with your worth the world amazed make,
How shall I quite the paines, ye suffer for my sake?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And you fresh bud of vertue springing fast,
Whom these sad eyes saw nigh vnto deaths dore,
What hath poore Virgin for such perill past,
Wherewith you to reward? Accept therefore
My simple selfe, and seruice euermore;
And he that high does sit, and all things see
With equall eyes, their merites to restore,
Behold what ye this day haue done for mee,
And what I cannot quite, requite with vsuree.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But sith the heauens, and your faire handeling
Haue made you maister of the field this day,
Your fortune maister eke with gouerning,
And well begun end all so well, I pray,
Ne let that wicked woman scape away;
For she it is, that did my Lord bethrall,
My dearest Lord, and deepe in dongeon lay,
Where he his better dayes hath wasted all.
O heare, how piteous he to you for ayd does call.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Forthwith he gaue in charge vnto his Squire,
That scarlot whore to keepen carefully;
Whiles he himselfe with greedie great desire
Into the Castle entred forcibly,
Where liuing creature none he did espye;
Then gan he lowdly through the house to call:
But no man car'd to answere to his crye.
There raignd a solemne silence ouer all,
Nor voice was heard, nor wight was seene in bowre or hall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last with creeping crooked pace forth came
An old old man, with beard as white as snow,
That on a staffe his feeble steps did frame,
And guide his wearie gate both too and fro:
For his eye sight him failed long ygo,
And on his arme a bounch of keyes he bore,
The which vnused rust did ouergrow:
Those were the keyes of euery inner dore,
But he could not them vse, but kept them still in store.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But very vncouth sight was to behold,
How he did fashion his vntoward pace,
For as he forward moou'd his footing old,
So backward still was turnd his wrincled face,
Vnlike to men, who euer as they trace,
Both feet and face one way are wont to lead.
This was the auncient keeper of that place,
And foster father of the Gyant dead;
His name Ignaro did his nature right aread.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His reuerend haires and holy grauitie
The knight much honord, as beseemed well,
And gently askt, where all the people bee,
Which in that stately building wont to dwell.
Who answerd him full soft, he could not tell.
Againe he askt, where that same knight was layd,
Whom great Orgoglio with his puissaunce fell
Had made his caytiue thrall; againe he sayde,
He could not tell: ne euer other answere made.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then asked he, which way he in might pas:
He could not tell, againe he answered.
Thereat the curteous knight displeased was,
And said, Old sire, it seemes thou hast not red
How ill it sits with that same siluer hed
In vaine to mocke, or mockt in vaine to bee:
But if thou be, as thou art pourtrahed
With natures pen, in ages graue degree,
Aread in grauer wise, what I demaund of thee.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His answere likewise was, he could not tell.
Whose senceless speach, and doted ignorance
When as the noble Prince had marked well,
He ghest his nature by his countenance,
And calmd his wrath with goodly temperance.
Then to him stepping, from his arme did reach
Those keyes, and made himselfe free enterance.
Each dore he opened without any breach;
There was no barre to stop, nor foe him to empeach.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There all within full rich arayd he found,
With royall arras and resplendent gold.
And did with store of euery thing abound,
That greatest Princes presence might behold.
But all the floore (too filthy to be told)
With bloud of guiltlesse babes, and innocents trew,
Which there were slaine, as sheepe out of the fold,
Defiled was, that dreadfull was to vew,
And sacred ashes ouer it was strowed new.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And there beside of marble stone was built
An Altare, caru'd with cunning imagery,
On which true Christians bloud was often spilt,
And holy Martyrs often doen to dye,
With cruell malice and strong tyranny:
Whose blessed sprites from vnderneath the stone
To God for vengeance cryde continually,
And with great griefe were often heard to grone,
That hardest heart would bleede, to heare their piteous mone.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Through euery rowme he sought, and euery bowr,
But no where could he find that wofull thrall:
At last he came vnto an yron doore,
That fast was lockt, but key found not at all
Emongst that bounch, to open it withall;
But in the same a little grate was pight,
Through which he sent his voyce, and lowd did call
With all his powre, to weet, if liuing wight
Were housed therewithin, whom he enlargen might.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therewith an hollow, dreary, murmuring voyce
These piteous plaints and dolours did resound;
O who is that, which brings me happy choyce
Of death, that here lye dying euery stound,
Yet liue perforce in balefull darkenesse bound?
For now three Moones haue chãged thrice their hew,
And haue beene thrice hid vnderneath the ground,
Since I the heauens chearefull face did vew,
O welcome thou, that doest of death bring tydings trew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which when that Champion heard, with percing point
Of pitty deare his hart was thrilled sore,
And trembling horrour ran through euery ioynt,
For ruth of gentle knight so fowle forlore:
Which shaking off, he rent that yron dore,
With furious force, and indignation fell;
Where entred in, his foot could find no flore,
But all a deepe descent, as darke as hell,
That breathed euer forth a filthie banefull smell.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But neither darkenesse fowle, nor filthy bands,
Nor noyous smell his purpose could withhold,
(Entire affection hateth nicer hands)
But that with constant zeale, and courage bold,
After long paines and labours manifold,
He found the meanes that Prisoner vp to reare;
Whose feeble thighes, vnhable to vphold
His pined corse, him scarse to light could beare,
A ruefull spectacle of death and ghastly drere.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His sad dull eyes deepe sunck in hollow pits,
Could not endure th'vnwonted sunne to view;
His bare thin cheekes for want of better bits,
And empty sides deceiued of their dew,
Could make a stony hart his hap to rew;
His rawbone armes, whose mighty brawned bowrs
Were wont to riue steele plates, and helmets hew,
Were cleane consum'd, and all his vitall powres
Decayd, and all his flesh shronk vp like withered flowres.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whom when his Lady saw, to him she ran
With hasty ioy: to see him made her glad,
And sad to view his visage pale and wan,
Who earst in flowres of freshest youth was clad.
Tho when her well of teares she wasted had,
She said, Ah dearest Lord, what euill starre
On you hath fround, and pourd his influence bad,
That of your selfe ye thus berobbed arre,
And this misseeming hew your manly looks doth marre?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But welcome now my Lord, in wele or woe,
Whose presence I haue lackt too long a day;
And fie on Fortune mine auowed foe,
Whose wrathfull wreakes them selues do now alay.
And for these wrongs shall treble penaunce pay
Of treble good: good growes of euils priefe.
The chearelesse man, whom sorrow did dismay,
Had no delight to treaten of his griefe;
His long endured famine needed more reliefe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Faire Lady, then said that victorious knight,
The things, that grieuous were to do, or beare,
Them to renew, I wote, breeds no delight:
Best musicke breeds delight in loathing eare:
But th'onely good, that growes of passed feare,
Is to be wise, and ware of like agein.
This dayes ensample hath this lesson deare
Deepe written in my heart with yron pen,
That blisse may not abide in state of mortall men.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Henceforth sir knight, take to you wonted strength,
And maister these mishaps with patient might;
Loe where your foe lyes stretcht in monstrous length,
And loe that wicked woman in your sight,
The roote of all your care, and wretched plight,
Now in your powre, to let her liue, or dye.
To do her dye (quoth Vna) were despight,
And shame t'auenge so weake an enimy;
But spoile her of her scarlot robe, and let her fly.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So as she bad, that witch they disaraid,
And robd of royall robes, and purple pall,
And ornaments that richly were displaid;
Ne spared they to strip her naked all.
Then when they had despoild her tire and call,
Such as she was, their eyes might her behold,
That her misshaped parts did them appall,
A loathly, wrinckled hag, ill fauoured, old,
Whose secret filth good manners biddeth not be told.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her craftie head was altogether bald,
And as in hate of honorable eld,
Was ouergrowne with scurfe and filthy scald;
Her teeth out of her rotten gummes were feld,
And her sowre breath abhominably smeld;
Her dried dugs, like bladders lacking wind,
Hong downe, and filthy matter from them weld;
Her wrizled skin as rough, as maple rind,
So scabby was, that would haue loathd all womankind.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her neather parts, the shame of all her kind,
My chaster Muse for shame doth blush to write;
But at her rompe she growing had behind
A foxes taile, with dong all fowly dight;
And eke her feete most monstrous were in sight;
For one of them was like an Eagles claw,
With griping talaunts armd to greedy fight,
The other like a Beares vneuen paw:
More vgly shape yet neuer liuing creature saw.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which when the knights beheld, amazd they were,
And wondred at so fowle deformed wight.
Such then (said Vna) as she seemeth here,
Such is the face of falshood, such the sight
Of fowle Duessa, when her borrowed light
Is laid away, and counterfesaunce knowne.
Thus when they had the witch disrobed quight,
And all her filthy feature open showne,
They let her goe at will, and wander wayes vnknowne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She flying fast from heauens hated face,
And from the world that her discouered wide,
Fled to the wastfull wildernesse apace,
From liuing eyes her open shame to hide,
And lurkt in rocks and caues long vnespide.
But that faire crew of knights, and Vna faire
Did in that castle afterwards abide,
To rest them selues, and weary powres repaire,
Where store they found of all, that dainty was and rare.

TITLE Faerie Queene, IX

RHYME a b a b

His loues and lignage Arthur tells
The knights knit friendly bands:
Sir Treuisan flies from Despayre,
Whom Redcrosse knight withstands.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O Goodly golden chaine, wherewith yfere
The vertues linked are in louely wize:
And noble minds of yore allyed were,
In braue poursuit of cheualrous emprize,
That none did others safety despize,
Nor aid enuy to him, in need that stands,
But friendly each did others prayse deuize
How to aduaunce with fauourable hands,
As this good Prince redeemd the Redcrosse knight from bands.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who when their powres, empaird through labour long,
With dew repast they had recured well,
And that weake captiue wight now wexed strong,
Them list no lenger there at leasure dwell,
But forward fare, as their aduentures fell,
But ere they parted, Vna faire besought
That straunger knight his name and nation tell;
Least so great good, as he for her had wrought,
Should die vnknown, & buried be in thanklesse thought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Faire virgin (said the Prince) ye me require
A thing without the compas of my wit:
For both the lignage and the certain Sire,
From which I sprong, from me are hidden yit.
For all so soone as life did me admit
Into this world, and shewed heauens light,
From mothers pap I taken was vnfit:
And streight deliuered to a Faery knight,
To be vpbrought in gentle thewes and martiall might.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vnto old Timon he me brought byliue,
Old Timon, who in youthly yeares hath beene
In warlike feates th'expertest man aliue,
And is the wisest now on earth I weene;
His dwelling is low in a valley greene,
Vnder the foot of Rauran mossy hore,
From whence the riuer Dee as siluer cleene
His tombling billowes rolls with gentle rore:
There all my dayes he traind me vp in vertuous lore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thither the great Magicien Merlin came,
As was his vse, ofttimes to visit me:
For he had charge my discipline to frame,
And Tutours nouriture to ouersee.
Him oft and oft I askt in priuitie,
Of what loines and what lignage I did spring:
Whose aunswere bad me still assured bee,
That I was sonne and heire vnto a king,
As time in her iust terme the truth to light should bring.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Well worthy impe, said then the Lady gent,
And Pupill fit for such a Tutours hand.
But what aduenture, or what high intent
Hath brought you hither into Faery land,
Aread Prince Arthur, crowne of Martiall band?
Full hard it is (quoth he) to read aright
The course of heauenly cause, or vnderstand
The secret meaning of th'eternall might,
That rules mens wayes, and rules the thoughts of liuing wight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For whither he through fatall deepe foresight
Me hither sent, for cause to me vnghest,
Or that fresh bleeding wound, which day and night
Whilome doth rancle in my riuen brest,
With forced fury following his behest,
Me hither brought by wayes yet neuer found,
You to haue helpt I hold my selfe yet blest.
Ah curteous knight (quoth she) what secret wound
Could euer find, to grieue the gentlest hart on ground?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Deare Dame (quoth he) you sleeping sparkes awake,
Which troubled once, into huge flames will grow,
Ne euer will their feruent fury slake,
Till liuing moysture into smoke do flow,
And wasted life do lye in ashes low.
Yet sithens silence lesseneth not my fire,
But told it flames, and hidden it does glow,
I will reuele, what ye so much desire:
Ah Loue, lay downe thy bow, the whiles I may respire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

It was in freshest flowre of youthly yeares,
When courage first does creepe in manly chest,
Then first the coale of kindly heat appeares
To kindle loue in euery liuing brest;
But me had warnd old Timons wise behest,
Those creeping flames by reason to subdew,
Before their rage grew to so great vnrest,
As miserable louers vse to rew,
Which still wex old in woe, whiles woe still wexeth new.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

That idle name of loue, and louers life,
As losse of time, and vertues enimy
I euer scornd, and ioyd to stirre vp strife,
In middest of their mournfull Tragedy,
Ay wont to laugh, when them I heard to cry,
And blow the fire, which them to ashes brent:
Their God himselfe, grieu'd at my libertie,
Shot many a dart at me with fiers intent,
But I them warded all with wary gouernment.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But all in vaine: no fort can be so strong,
Ne fleshly brest can armed be so sound,
But will at last be wonne with battrie long,
Or vnawares at disauantage found;
Nothing is sure, that growes on earthly ground:
And who most trustes in arme of fleshly might,
And boasts, in beauties chaine not to be bound,
Doth soonest fall in disauentrous fight,
And yeeldes his caytiue neck to victours most despight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ensample make of him your haplesse ioy,
And of my selfe now mated, as ye see;
Whose prouder vaunt that proud auenging boy
Did soone pluck downe, and curbd my libertie.
For on a day prickt forth with iollitie
Of looser life, and heat of hardiment,
Raunging the forest wide on courser free,
The fields, the floods, the heauens with one consent
Did seeme to laugh on me, and fauour mine intent.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For-wearied with my sports, I did alight
From loftie steed, and downe to sleepe me layd;
The verdant gras my couch did goodly dight,
And pillow was my helmet faire displayd:
Whiles euery sence the humour sweet embayd,
And slombring soft my hart did steale away,
Me seemed, by my side a royall Mayd
Her daintie limbes full softly down did lay:
So faire a creature yet saw neuer sunny day.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Most goodly glee and louely blandishment
She to me made, and bad me loue her deare,
For dearely sure her loue was to me bent,
As when iust time expired should appeare.
But whether dreames delude, or true it were,
Was neuer hart so rauisht with delight,
Ne liuing man like words did euer heare,
As she to me deliuered all that night;
And at her parting said, She Queene of Faeries hight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

When I awoke, and found her place deuoyd,
And nought but pressed gras, where she had lyen,
I sorrowed all so much, as earst I ioyd,
And washed all her place with watry eyen.
From that day forth I lou'd that face diuine;
From that day forth I cast in carefull mind,
To seeke her out with labour, and long tyne,
And neuer vow to rest, till her I find,
Nine monethes I seeke in vaine yet ni'll that vow vnbind.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thus as he spake, his visage wexed pale,
And chaunge of hew great passion did bewray;
Yet still he stroue to cloke his inward bale,
And hide the smoke, that did his fire display,
Till gentle Vna thus to him gan say;
O happy Queene of Faeries, that hast found
Mongst many, one that with his prowesse may
Defend thine honour, and thy foes confound:
True Loues are oftẽ sown, but seldom grow on ground.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thine, O then, said the gentle Redcrosse knight,
Next to that Ladies loue, shalbe the place,
O fairest virgin, full of heauenly light,
Whose wondrous faith, exceeding earthly race,
Was firmest fixt in mine extremest case,
And you, my Lord, the Patrone of my life,
Of that great Queene may well gaine worthy grace:
For onely worthy you through prowes priefe
Yf liuing man mote worthy be, to be her liefe.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So diuersly discoursing of their loues,
The golden Sunne his glistring head gan shew,
And sad remembraunce now the Prince amoues,
With fresh desire his voyage to pursew:
Als Vna earnd her traueill to renew.
Then those two knights, fast friendship for to bynd,
And loue establish each to other trew,
Gaue goodly gifts, the signes of gratefull mynd,
And eke as pledges firme, right hands together ioynd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Prince Arthur gaue a boxe of Diamond sure,
Embowd with gold and gorgeous ornament,
Wherein were closd few drops of liquor pure,
Of wondrous worth, and vertue excellent,
That any wound could heale incontinent:
Which to requite, the Redcrosse knight him gaue
A booke, wherein his Saueours testament
Was writ with golden letters rich and braue;
A worke of wondrous grace, and able soules to saue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thus beene they parted, Arthur on his way
To seeke his loue, and th'other for to fight
With Vnaes foe, that all her realme did pray.
But she now weighing the decayed plight,
And shrunken synewes of her chosen knight,
Would not a while her forward course pursew,
Ne bring him forth in face of dreadfull fight,
Till he recouered had his former hew:
For him to be yet weake and wearie well she knew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So as they traueild, lo they gan espy
An armed knight towards them gallop fast,
That seemed from some feared foe to fly,
Or other griesly thing, that him agast.
Still as he fled, his eye was backward cast,
As if his feare still followed him behind;
Als flew his steed, as he his bands had brast,
And with his winged heeles did tread the wind,
As he had beene a fole of Pegasus his kind.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Nigh as he drew, they might perceiue his head
To be vnarmd, and curld vncombed heares
Vpstaring stiffe, dismayd with vncouth dread;
Nor drop of bloud in all his face appeares
Nor life in limbe: and to increase his feares,
In fowle reproch of knighthoods faire degree,
About his neck an hempen rope he weares,
That with his glistring armes does ill agree;
But he of rope or armes has now no memoree.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The Redcrosse knight toward him crossed fast,
To weet, what mister wight was so dismayd:
There him he finds all sencelesse and aghast,
That of him selfe he seemd to be afrayd;
Whom hardly he from flying forward stayd,
Till he these wordes to him deliuer might;
Sir knight, aread who hath ye thus arayd,
And eke from whom make ye this hasty flight:
For neuer knight I saw in such misseeming plight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He answerd nought at all, but adding new
Feare to his first amazment, staring wide
With stony eyes, and hartlesse hollow hew,
Astonisht stood, as one that had aspide
Infernall furies, with their chaines vntide.
Him yet againe, and yet againe bespake
The gentle knight; who nought to him replide,
But trembling euery ioynt did inly quake,
And foltring tongue at last these words seemd forth to shake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For Gods deare loue, Sir knight, do me not stay;
For loe he comes, he comes fast after mee.
Eft looking backe would faine haue runne away;
But he him forst to stay, and tellen free
The secret cause of his perplexitie:
Yet nathemore by his bold hartie speach,
Could his bloud-frosen hart emboldned bee,
But through his boldnesse rather feare did reach,
Yet forst, at last he made through silence suddein breach.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And am I now in safetie sure (quoth he)
From him, that would haue forced me to dye?
And is the point of death now turnd fro mee,
That I may tell this haplesse history?
Feare nought: (quoth he) no daunger now is nye?
Then shall I you recount a ruefull cace,
(Said he) the which with this vnlucky eye
I late beheld, and had not greater grace
Me reft from it, had bene partaker of the place.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

I lately chaunst (Would I had neuer chaunst)
With a faire knight to keepen companee,
Sir Terwin hight, that well himselfe aduaunst
In all affaires, and was both bold and free,
But not so happie as mote happie bee:
He lou'd, as was his lot, a Ladie gent,
That him againe lou'd in the least degree:
For she was proud, and of too high intent,
And ioyd to see her louer languish and lament.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

From whom returning sad and comfortlesse,
As on the way together we did fare,
We met that villen (God from him me blesse)
That cursed wight, from whom I scapt whyleare,
A man of hell, that cals himselfe Despaire:
Who first vs greets, and after faire areedes
Of tydings strange, and of aduentures rare:
So creeping close, as Snake in hidden weedes,
Inquireth of our states, and of our knightly deedes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which when he knew, and felt ourfeeble harts
Embost with bale, and bitter byting griefe,
Which loue had launched with his deadly darts,
With wounding words and termes of foule repriefe
He pluckt from vs all hope of due reliefe,
That earst vs held in loue of lingring life;
Then hopelesse hartlesse, gan the cunning thiefe
Perswade vs die, to stint all further strife:
To me he lent this rope, to him a rustie knife.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

With which sad instrument of hastie death,
That wofull louer, loathing lenger light,
A wide way made to let forth liuing breath.
But I more fearefull, or more luckie wight,
Dismayd with that deformed dismall sight,
Fled fast away, halfe dead with dying feare:
Ne yet assur'd of life by you, Sir knight,
Whose like infirmitie like chaunce may beare:
But God you neuer let his charmed speeches heare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

How may a man (said he) with idle speach
Be wonne, to spoyle the Castle of his health?
I wote (quoth he) whom triall late did teach,
That like would not for all this worldes wealth:
His subtill tongue, like dropping honny, mealt'th
Into the hart, and searcheth euery vaine,
That ere one be aware, by secret stealth
His powre is reft, and weaknesse doth remaine.
O neuer Sir desire to try his guilefull traine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Certes (said he) hence shall I neuer rest,
Till I that treachours art haue heard and tride;
And you Sir knight, whose name mote I request,
Of grace do me vnto his cabin guide.
I that hight Treuisan (quoth he) will ride
Against my liking backe, to doe you grace:
But nor for gold nor glee will I abide
By you, when ye arriue in that same place;
For leuer had I die, then see his deadly face.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ere long they come, where that same wicked wight
His dwelling has, low in an hollow caue,
Farre vnderneath a craggie clift ypight,
Darke, dolefull, drearie, like a greedie graue,
That still for carrion carcases doth craue:
On top whereof aye dwelt the ghastly Owle,
Shrieking his balefull note, which euer draue
Farre from that haunt all other chearefull fowle;
And all about it wandring ghostes did waile and howle.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And all about old stockes and stubs of trees,
Whereon nor fruit, nor leafe was euer seene,
Did hang vpon the ragged rocky knees;
On which had many wretches hanged beene,
Whose carcases were scattered on the greene,
And throwne about the cliffs. Arriued there,
That bare-head knight for dread and dolefull teene,
Would faine haue fled, ne durst approchen neare,
But th'other forst him stay, and comforted in feare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

That darkesome caue they enter, where they find
That cursed man, low sitting on the ground,
Musing full sadly in his sullein mind;
His griesie lockes, long growen, and vnbound,
Disordred hong about his shoulders round,
And hid his face; through which his hollow eyne
Lookt deadly dull, and stared as astound;
His raw-bone cheekes through penurie and pine,
Were shronke into his iawes, as he did neuer dine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His garment nought but many ragged clouts,
With thornes together pind and patched was,
The which his naked sides he wrapt abouts;
And him beside there lay vpon the gras
A drearie corse, whose life away did pas,
All wallowd in his owne yet luke-warme blood,
That from his wound yet welled fresh alas;
In which a rustie knife fast fixed stood,
And made an open passage for the gushing flood.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which piteous spectacle, approuing trew
The wofull tale that Treuisan had told,
When as the gentle Redcrosse knight did vew,
With firie zeale he burnt in courage bold,
Him to auenge, before his bloud were cold,
And to the villein said, Thou damned wight,
The author of this fact, we here behold,
What iustice can but iudge against thee right,
With thine owne bloud to price his bloud, here shed in sight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

What franticke fit (quoth he) hath thus distraught
Thee, foolish man, so rash a doome to giue?
What iustice euer other iudgement taught,
But he should die, who merites not to liue?
None else to death this man despayring driue,
But his owne guiltie mind deseruing death.
Is then vniust to each his due to giue?
Or let him die, that loatheth liuing breath?
Or let him die at ease, that liueth here vneath?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who trauels by the wearie wandring way,
To come vnto his wished home in haste,
And meetes a flood, that doth his passage stay,
Is not great grace to helpe him ouer past,
Or free his feet, that in the myre sticke fast?
Most enuious man, that grieues at neighbours good,
And fond, that ioyest in the woe thou hast,
Why wilt not let him passe, that long hath stood
Vpon the banke, yet wilt thy selfe not passe the flood?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He there does now enioy eternall rest
And happie ease, which thou doest want and craue,
And further from it daily wanderest:
What if some litle paine the passage haue,
That makes fraile flesh to feare the bitter waue?
Is not short paine well borne, that brings long ease,
And layes the soule to sleepe in quiet graue?
Sleepe after toyle, port after stormie seas,
Ease after warre, death after life does greatly please.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight much wondred at his suddeine wit,
And said, The terme of life is limited,
Ne may a man prolong, nor shorten it;
The souldier may not moue from watchfull sted,
Nor leaue his stand, vntill his Captaine bed.
Who life did limit by almightie doome,
(Quoth he) knowes best the termes established;
And he, that points the Centonell his roome,
Doth license him depart at sound of morning droome.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Is not his deed, what euer thing is donne,
In heauen and earth? did not he all create
To die againe? all ends that was begonne.
Their times in his eternall booke of fate
Are written sure, and haue their certaine date.
Who then can striue with strong necessitie,
That holds the world in his still chaunging state,
Or shunne the death ordaynd by destinie?
Whẽ houre of death is come, let none aske whence, nor why.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The lenger life, I wote the greater sin,
The greater sin, the greater punishment:
All those great battels, which thou boasts to win,
Through strife, and bloud-shed, and auengement,
Now praysd, hereafter deare thou shalt repent:
For life must life, and bloud must bloud repay.
Is not enough thy euill life forespent?
For he, that once hath missed the right way,
The further he doth goe, the further he doth stray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then do no further goe, no further stray,
But here lie downe, and to thy rest betake,
Th'ill to preuent, that life ensewen may.
For what hath life, that may it loued make,
And giues not rather cause it to forsake?
Feare, sicknesse, age, losse, labour, sorrow, strife,
Paine, hunger, cold, that makes the hart to quake;
And euer fickle fortune rageth rife,
All which, and thousands mo do make a loathsome life.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thou wretched man, of death hast greatest need,
If in true ballance thou wilt weigh thy state:
For neuer knight, that dared warlike deede,
More lucklesse disauentures did amate:
Witnesse the dongeon deepe, wherein of late
Thy life shut vp, for death so oft did call;
And though good lucke prolonged hath thy date,
Yet death then, would the like mishaps forestall,
Into the which hereafter thou maiest happen fall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Why then doest thou, ô man of sin, desire
To draw thy dayes forth to their last degree?
Is not the measure of thy sinfull hire
High heaped vp with huge iniquitie,
Against the day of wrath, to burden thee?
Is not enough, that to this Ladie milde
Thou falsed hast thy faith with periurie,
And sold thy selfe to serue Duessa vilde,
With whom in all abuse thou hast thy selfe defilde?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Is not he iust, that all this doth behold
From highest heauen, and beares an equall eye?
Shall he thy sins vp in his knowledge fold,
And guiltie be of thine impietie?
Is not his law, Let euery sinner die:
Die shall all flesh? what then must needs be donne,
Is it not better to doe willinglie,
Then linger, till the glasse be all out ronne?
Death is the end of woes: die soone, O faeries sonne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight was much enmoued with his speach,
That as a swords point through his hart did perse,
And in his conscience made a secret breach,
Well knowing true all, that he did reherse,
And to his fresh remembrance did reuerse
The vgly vew of his deformed crimes,
That all his manly powres it did disperse,
As he were charmed with inchaunted rimes,
That oftentimes he quakt, and fainted oftentimes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In which amazement, when the Miscreant
Perceiued him to wauer weake and fraile,
Whiles trembling horror did his conscience dant,
And hellish anguish did his soule assaile,
To driue him to despaire, and quite to quaile,
He shew'd him painted in a table plaine,
The damned ghosts, that doe in torments waile,
And thousand feends that doe them endlesse paine
With fire and brimstone, which for euer shall remaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The sight whereof so throughly him dismaid,
That nought but death before his eyes he saw,
And euer burning wrath before him laid,
By righteous sentence of th'Almighties law:
Then gan the villein him to ouercraw,
And brought vnto him swords, ropes, poison, fire,
And all that might him to perdition draw;
And bad him choose, what death he would desire:
For death was due to him, that had prouokt Gods ire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But when as none of them he saw him take,
He to him raught a dagger sharpe and keene,
And gaue it him in hand: his hand did quake,
And tremble like a leafe of Aspin greene,
And troubled bloud through his pale face was seene
To come, and goe with tydings from the hart,
As it a running messenger had beene.
At last resolu'd to worke his finall smart,
He lifted vp his hand, that backe againe did start.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which when as Vna saw, through euery vaine
The crudled cold ran to her well of life,
As in a swowne: but soone reliu'd againe,
Out of his hand she snatcht the cursed knife,
And threw it to the ground, enraged rife,
And to him said, Fie, fie, faint harted knight,
What meanest thou by this reprochfull strife?
Is this the battell, which thou vauntst to fight
With that fire-mouthed Dragon, horrible and bright?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Come, come away, fraile, seely, fleshly wight,
Ne let vaine words bewitch thy manly hart,
Ne diuelish thoughts dismay thy constant spright.
In heauenly mercies hast thou not a part?
Why shouldst thou then despeire, that chosen art?
Where iustice growes, there grows eke greater grace,
The which doth quench the brond of hellish smart,
And that accurst hand-writing doth deface,
Arise, Sir knight arise, and leaue this cursed place.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So vp he rose, and thence amounted streight.
Which when the carle beheld, and saw his guest
Would safe depart, for all his subtill sleight,
He chose an halter from among the rest,
And with it hung himselfe, vnbid vnblest.
But death he could not worke himselfe thereby;
For thousand times he so himselfe had drest,
Yet nathelesse it could not doe him die,
Till he should die his last, that is eternally.

TITLE Faerie Queene X

RHYME a b a b

Her faithfull knight faire Vna brings
to house of Holinesse,
Where he is taught repentance, and
the way to heauenly blesse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

WHat man is he, that boasts of fleshly might,
And vaine assurance of mortality,
Which all so soone, as it doth come to fight,
Against spirituall foes, yeelds by and by,
Or from the field most cowardly doth fly?
Ne let the man ascribe it to his skill,
That thorough grace hath gained victory.
If any strength we haue, it is to ill,
But all the good is Gods, both power and eke will.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

By that, which lately hapned, Vna saw,
That this her knight was feeble, and too faint;
And all his sinews woxen weake and raw,
Through long enprisonment, and hard constraint,
Which he endured in his late restraint,
That yet he was vnfit for bloudie fight:
Therefore to cherish him with diets daint,
She cast to bring him, where he chearen might,
Till he recouered had his late decayed plight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There was an auntient house not farre away,
Renowmd throughout the world for sacred lore,
And pure vnspotted life: so well they say
It gouernd was, and guided euermore,
Through wisedome of a matrone graue and hore;
Whose onely ioy was to relieue the needes
Of wretched soules, and helpe the helpelesse pore:
All night she spent in bidding of her bedes,
And all the day in doing good and godly deedes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Dame Cælia men did her call, as thought
From heauen to come, or thither to arise,
The mother of three daughters, well vpbrought
In goodly thewes, and godly exercise:
The eldest two most sober, chast, and wise,
Fidelia and Speranza virgins were,
Though spousd, yet wanting wedlocks solemnize;
But faire Charissa to a louely fere
Was lincked, and by him had many pledges dere.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Arriued there, the dore they find fast lockt;
For it was warely watched night and day,
For feare of many foes: but when they knockt,
The Porter opened vnto them streight way:
He was an aged syre, all hory gray,
With lookes full lowly cast, and gate full slow,
Wont on a staffe his feeble steps to stay,
Hight Humiltá. They passe in stouping low;
For streight & narrow was the way, which he did show.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Each goodly thing is hardest to begin,
But entred in a spacious court they see,
Both plaine, and pleasant to be walked in,
Where them does meete a francklin faire and free,
And entertaines with comely courteous glee,
His name was Zele, that him right well became,
For in his speeches and behauiour hee
Did labour liuely to expresse the same,
And gladly did them guide, till to the Hall they came.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There fairely them receiues a gentle Squire,
Of milde demeanure, and rare courtesie,
Right cleanly clad in comely sad attire;
In word and deede that shew'd great modestie,
And knew his good to all of each degree,
Hight Reuerence. He them with speeches meet
Does faire entreat; no courting nicetie,
But simple true, and eke vnfained sweet,
As might become a Squire so great persons to greet.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And afterwards them to his Dame he leades,
That aged Dame, the Ladie of the place:
Who all this while was busie at her beades:
Which doen, she vp arose with seemely grace,
And toward them full matronely did pace.
Where when that fairest Vna she beheld,
Whom well she knew to spring from heauenly race,
Her hart with ioy vnwonted inly sweld,
As feeling wondrous comfort in her weaker eld.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And her embracing said, ô happie earth,
Whereon thy innocent feet doe euer tread,
Most vertuous virgin borne of heauenly berth,
That to redeeme thy woefull parents head,
From tyrans rage, and euer-dying dread,
Hast wandred through the world now long a day;
Yet ceasest not thy wearie soles to lead,
What grace hath thee now hither brought this way?
Or doen thy feeble feet vnweeting hither stray?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Strange thing it is an errant knight to see
Here in this place, or any other wight,
That hither turnes his steps. So few there bee,
That chose the narrow path, or seeke the right:
All keepe the broad high way, and take delight
With many rather for to go astray,
And be partakers of their euill plight,
Then with a few to walke the rightest way;
O foolish men, why haste ye to your owne decay?

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thy selfe to see, and tyred limbs to rest,
O matrone sage (quoth she) I hither came,
And this good knight his way with me addrest,
Led with thy prayses and broad-blazed fame,
That vp to heauen is blowne. The auncient Dame
Him goodly greeted in her modest guise,
And entertaynd them both, as best became,
With all the court'sies, that she could deuise.
Ne wanted ought, to shew her bounteous or wise.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thus as they gan of sundry things deuise,
Loe two most goodly virgins came in place,
Ylinked arme in arme in louely wise,
With countenance demure, and modest grace,
They numberd euen steps and equall pace:
Of which the eldest, that Fidelia hight,
Like sunny beames threw from her Christall face,
That could haue dazd the rash beholders sight,
And round about her head did shine like heauens light.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She was araied all in lilly white,
And in her right hand bore a cup of gold,
With wine and water fild vp to the hight,
In which a Serpent did himselfe enfold,
That horrour made to all, that did behold;
But she no whit did chaunge her constant mood:
And in her other hand she fast did hold
A booke, that was both signd and seald with blood,
Wherein darke things were writ, hard to be vnderstood.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her younger sister, that Speranza hight,
Was clad in blew, that her beseemed well;
Not all so chearefull seemed she of sight,
As was her sister; whether dread did dwell,
Or anguish in her hart, is hard to tell:
Vpon her arme a siluer anchor lay,
Whereon she leaned euer, as befell:
And euer vp to heauen, as she did pray,
Her stedfast eyes were bent, ne swarued other way.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

They seeing Vna, towards her gan wend,
Who them encounters with like courtesie;
Many kind speeches they betwene them spend,
And greatly ioy each other well to see:
Then to the knight with shamefast modestie
They turne themselues, at Vnaes meeke request,
And him salute with well beseeming glee:
Who faire them quites, as him beseemed best,
And goodly gan discourse of many a noble gest.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then Vna thus; But she your sister deare;
The deare Charissa where is she become?
Or wants she health, or busie is elsewhere?
Ah no, said they, but forth she may not come:
For she of late is lightned of her wombe,
And hath encreast the world with one sonne more,
That her to see should be but troublesome.
Indeede (quoth she) that should her trouble sore,
But thankt be God, and her encrease so euermore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then said the aged Coelia, Deare dame,
And you good Sir, I wote that of your toyle,
And labours long, through which ye hither came,
Ye both forwearied be: therefore a whyle
I read you rest, and to your bowres recoyle.
Then called she a Groome, that forth him led
Into a goodly lodge, and gan despoile
Of puissant armes, and laid in easie bed;
His name was meeke Obedience rightfully ared.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now when their wearie limbes with kindly rest,
And bodies were refresht with due repast,
Faire Vna gan Fidelia faire request,
To haue her knight into her schoolehouse plaste,
That of her heauenly learning he might taste,
And heare the wisedome of her words diuine.
She graunted, and that knight so much agraste,
That she him taught celestiall discipline,
And opened his dull eyes, that light mote in them shine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And that her sacred Booke, with bloud ywrit,
That none could read, except she did them teach,
She vnto him disclosed euery whit,
And heauenly documents thereout did preach,
That weaker wit of man could neuer reach,
Of God, of grace, of iustice, of free will,
That wonder was to heare her goodly speach:
For she was able, with her words to kill,
And raise againe to life the hart, that she did thrill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And when she list poure out her larger spright,
She would commaund the hastie Sunne to stay,
Or backward turne his course from heauens hight;
Sometimes great hostes of men she could dismay,
Dry-shod to passe, she parts the flouds in tway;
And eke huge mountaines from their natiue seat
She would commaund, themselues to beare away,
And throw in raging sea with roaring threat.
Almightie God her gaue such powre, and puissance great.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The faithfull knight now grew in litle space,
By hearing her, and by her sisters lore,
To such perfection of all heauenly grace,
That wretched world he gan for to abhore,
And mortall life gan loath, as thing forlore,
Greeu'd with remembrance of his wicked wayes,
And prickt with anguish of his sinnes so sore,
That he desirde to end his wretched dayes:
So much the dart of sinfull guilt the soule dismayes.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But wise Speranza gaue him comfort sweet,
And taught him how to take assured hold
Vpon her siluer anchor, as was meet;
Else had his sinnes so great, and manifold
Made him forget all that Fidelia told.
In this distressed doubtfull agonie,
When him his dearest Vna did behold,
Disdeining life, desiring leaue to die,
She found her selfe assayld with great perplexitie.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And came to Coelia to declare her smart,
Who well acquainted with that commune plight,
Which sinfull horror workes in wounded hart,
Her wisely comforted all that she might,
With goodly counsell and aduisement right;
And streightway sent with carefull diligence,
To fetch a Leach, the which had great insight
In that disease of grieued conscience,
And well could cure the same; His name was Patience.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who comming to that soule-diseased knight,
Could hardly him intreat, to tell his griefe:
Which knowne, and all that noyd his heauie spright
Well searcht, eftsoones he gan apply reliefe
Of salues and med'cines, which had passing priefe,
And thereto added words of wondrous might:
By which to ease he him recured briefe,
And much asswag'd the passion of his plight,
That he his paine endur'd, as seeming now more light.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But yet the cause and root of all his ill,
Inward corruption, and infected sin,
Not purg'd nor heald, behind remained still,
And festring sore did rankle yet within,
Close creeping twixt the marrow and the skin.
Which to extirpe, he laid him priuily
Downe in a darkesome lowly place farre in,
Whereas he meant his corrosiues to apply,
And with streight diet tame his stubborne malady.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In ashes and sackcloth he did array
His daintie corse, proud humors to abate,
And dieted with fasting euery day,
The swelling of his wounds to mitigate,
And made him pray both earely and eke late:
And euer as superfluous flesh did rot
Amendment readie still at hand did wayt,
To pluck it out with pincers firie whot,
That soone in him was left no one corrupted iot.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And bitter Penance with an yron whip,
Was wont him once to disple euery day:
And sharpe Remorse his hart did pricke and nip,
That drops of bloud thence like a well did play;
And sad Repentance vsed to embay
His bodie in salt water smarting sore,
The filthy blots of sinne to wash away.
So in short space they did to health restore
The man that would not liue, but earst lay at deathes dore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In which his torment often was so great,
That like a Lyon he would cry and rore,
And rend his flesh, and his owne synewes eat.
His owne deare Vna hearing euermore
His ruefull shriekes and gronings, often tore
Her guiltlesse garments, and her golden heare,
For pitty of his paine and anguish sore;
Yet all with patience wisely she did beare;
For well she wist, his crime could else be neuer cleare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whom thus recouer'd by wise Patience,
And trew Repentance they to Vna brought:
Who ioyous of his cured conscience,
Him dearely kist, and fairely eke besought
Himselfe to chearish, and consuming thought
To put away out of his carefull brest.
By this Charissa, late in child-bed brought,
Was woxen strong, and left her fruitfull nest;
To her faire Vna brought this vnacquainted guest.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She was a woman in her freshest age,
Of wondrous beauty, and of bountie rare,
With goodly grace and comely personage,
That was on earth not easie to compare;
Full of great loue, but Cupids wanton snare
As hell she hated, chast in worke and will;
Her necke and breasts were euer open bare,
That ay thereof her babes might sucke their fill;
The rest was all in yellow robes arayed still.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

A multitude of babes about her hong,
Playing their sports, that ioyd her to behold,
Whom still she fed, whiles they were weake & young,
But thrust them forth still, as they wexed old:
And on her head she wore a tyre of gold,
Adornd with gemmes and owches wondrous faire,
Whose passing price vneath was to be told;
And by her side there sate a gentle paire
Of turtle doues, she sitting in an yuorie chaire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight and Vna entring, faire her greet,
And bid her ioy of that her happie brood;
Who them requites with court'sies seeming meet,
And entertaines with friendly chearefull mood.
Then Vna her besought, to be so good,
As in her vertuous rules to schoole her knight,
Now after all his torment well withstood,
In that sad house of Penaunce, where his spright
Had past the paines of hell, and long enduring night.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

She was right ioyous of her iust request,
And taking by the hand that Faeries sonne,
Gan him instruct in euery good behest,
Of loue, and righteousnesse, and well to donne,
And wrath, and hatred warely to shonne,
That drew on men Gods hatred, and his wrath,
And many soules in dolours had fordonne:
In which when him she well instructed hath,
From thence to heauen she teacheth him the ready path.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Wherein his weaker wandring steps to guide,
An auncient matrone she to her does call,
Whose sober lookes her wisedome well descride:
Her name was Mercie, well knowne ouer all,
To be both gratious, and eke liberall:
To whom the carefull charge of him she gaue,
To lead aright, that he should neuer fall
In all his wayes through this wide worldes waue,
That Mercy in the end his righteous soule might saue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The godly Matrone by the hand him beares
Forth from her presence, by a narrow way,
Scattred with bushy thornes, and ragged breares,
Which still before him she remou'd away,
That nothing might his ready passage stay:
And euer when his feet encombred were,
Or gan to shrinke, or from the right to stray,
She held him fast, and firmely did vpbeare,
As carefull Nourse her child from falling oft does reare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Eftsoones vnto an holy Hospitall,
That was fore by the way, she did him bring,
In which seuen Bead-men that had vowed all
Their life to seruice of high heauens king
Did spend their dayes in doing godly thing:
Their gates to all were open euermore,
That by the wearie way were traueiling,
And one sate wayting euer them before,
To call in-commers by, that needy were and pore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The first of them that eldest was, and best,
Of all the house had charge and gouernement,
As Guardian and Steward of the rest:
His office was to giue entertainement
And lodging, vnto all that came, and went:
Not vnto such, as could him feast againe,
And double quite, for that he on them spent,
But such, as want of harbour did constraine:
Those for Gods sake his dewty was to entertaine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The second was as Almner of the place,
His office was, the hungry for to feed,
And thristy giue to drinke, a worke of grace:
He feard not once him selfe to be in need,
Ne car'd to hoord for those, whom he did breede:
The grace of God he layd vp still in store,
Which as a stocke he left vnto his seede;
He had enough, what need him care for more?
And had he lesse, yet some he would giue to the pore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The third had of their wardrobe custodie,
In which were not rich tyres, nor garments gay,
The plumes of pride, and wings of vanitie,
But clothes meet to keepe keene could away,
And naked nature seemely to aray;
With which bare wretched wights he dayly clad,
The images of God in earthly clay;
And if that no spare cloths to giue he had,
His owne coate he would cut, and it distribute glad.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The fourth appointed by his office was,
Poore prisoners to relieue with gratious ayd,
And captiues to redeeme with price of bras,
From Turkes and Sarazins, which them had stayd;
And though they faultie were, yet well he wayd,
That God to vs forgiueth euery howre
Much more then that, why they in bands were layd,
And he that harrowd hell with heauie stowre,
The faultie soules from thence brought to his heauenly bowre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The fift had charge sicke persons to attend,
And comfort those, in point of death which lay;
For them most needeth comfort in the end,
When sin, and hell, and death do most dismay
The feeble soule departing hence away.
All is but lost, that liuing we bestow,
If not well ended at our dying day.
O man haue mind of that last bitter throw;
For as the tree does fall, so lyes it euer low.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The sixt had charge of them now being dead,
In seemely sort their corses to engraue,
And deck with dainty flowres their bridall bed,
That to their heauenly spouse both sweet and braue
They might appeare, when he their soules shall saue.
The wondrous workemanship of Gods owne mould,
Whose face he made, all beasts to feare, and gaue
All in his hand, euen dead we honour should.
Ah dearest God me graunt, I dead be not defould.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The seuenth now after death and buriall done,
Had charge the tender Orphans of the dead
And widowes ayd, least they should be vndone:
In face of iudgement he their right would plead,
Ne ought the powre of mighty men did dread
In their defence, nor would for gold or fee
Be wonne their rightfull causes downe to tread:
And when they stood in most necessitee,
He did supply their want, and gaue them euer free.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There when the Elfin knight arriued was,
The first and chiefest of the seuen, whose care
Was guests to welcome, towardes him did pas:
Where seeing Mercie, that his steps vp bare,
And alwayes led, to her with reuerence rare
He humbly louted in meeke lowlinesse,
And seemely welcome for her did prepare:
For of their order she was Patronesse,
Albe Charissa were their chiefest founderesse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There she awhile him stayes, him selfe to rest,
That to the rest more able he might bee:
During which time, in euery good behest
And godly worke of Almes and charitee
She him instructed with great industree;
Shortly therein so perfect he became,
That from the first vnto the last degree,
His mortall life he learned had to frame
In holy righteousnesse, without rebuke or blame.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thence forward by that painfull way they pas,
Forth to an hill, that was both steepe and hy;
On top whereof a sacred chappell was,
And eke a litle Hermitage thereby,
Wherein an aged holy man did lye,
That day and night said his deuotion,
Ne other worldly busines did apply;
His name was heauenly Contemplation;
Of God and goodnesse was his meditation.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Great grace that old man to him giuen had;
For God he often saw from heauens hight,
All were his earthly eyen both blunt and bad,
And through great age had lost their kindly sight,
Yet wondrous quick and persant was his spright,
As Eagles eye, that can behold the Sunne:
That hill they scale with all their powre and might,
That his frayle thighes nigh wearie and fordonne
Gan faile, but by her helpe the top at last he wonne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There they do finde that godly aged Sire,
With snowy lockes adowne his shoulders shed,
As hoarie frost with spangles doth attire
The mossy braunches of an Oke halfe ded.
Each bone might through his body well be red,
And euery sinew seene through his long fast:
For nought he car'd his carcas long vnfed;
His mind was full of spirituall repast,
And pyn'd his flesh, to keepe his body low and chast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Who when these two approching he aspide,
At their first presence grew agrieued sore,
That forst him lay his heauenly thoughts aside;
And had he not that Dame respected more,
Whom highly he did reuerence and adore,
He would not once haue moued for the knight.
They him saluted standing far afore;
Who well them greeting, humbly did requight,
And asked, to what end they clomb that tedious height.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

What end (quoth she) should cause vs take such paine,
But that same end, which euery liuing wight
Should make his marke, high heauen to attaine?
Is not from hence the way, that leadeth right
To that most glorious house, that glistreth bright
With burning starres, and euerliuing fire,
Whereof the keyes are to thy hand behight
By wise Fidelia? she doth thee require,
To shew it to this knight, according his desire.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thrise happy man, said then the father graue,
Whose staggering steps thy steady hand doth lead,
And shewes the way, his sinfull soule to saue.
Who better can the way to heauen aread,
Then thou thy selfe, that was both borne and bred
In heauenly throne, where thousand Angels shine?
Thou doest the prayers of the righteous sead
Present before the maiestie diuine,
And his auenging wrath to clemencie incline.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Yet since thou bidst, thy pleasure shalbe donne.
Then come thou man of earth, and see the way,
That neuer yet was seene of Faeries sonne,
That neuer leads the traueiler astray,
But after labours long, and sad delay,
Brings them to ioyous rest and endlesse blis.
But first thou must a season fast and pray,
Till from her bands the spright assoiled is,
And haue her strength recur'd from fraile infirmitis.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

That done, he leads him to the highest Mount;
Such one, as that same mighty man of God,
That bloud-red billowes like a walled front
On either side disparted with his rod,
Till that his army dry-foot through them yod,
Dwelt fortie dayes vpon; where writ in stone
With bloudy letters by the hand of God,
The bitter doome of death and balefull mone
He did receiue, whiles flashing fire about him shone.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Or like that sacred hill, whose head full hie,
Adornd with fruitfull Oliues all arownd,
Is, as it were for endlesse memory
Of that deare Lord, who oft thereon was fownd,
For euer with a flowring girlond crownd:
Or like that pleasaunt Mount, that is for ay
Through famous Poets verse each where renownd,
On which the thrise three learned Ladies play
Their heauenly notes, and make full many a louely lay.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

From thence, far off he vnto him did shew
A litle path, that was both steepe and long,
Which to a goodly Citie led his vew;
Whose wals and towres were builded high and strong
Of perle and precious stone, that earthly tong
Cannot describe, nor wit of man can tell;
Too high a ditty for my simple song;
The Citie of the great king hight it well,
Wherein eternall peace and happinesse doth dwell.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

As he thereon stood gazing, he might see
The blessed Angels to and fro descend
From highest heauen, in gladsome companee,
And with great ioy into that Citie wend,
As commonly as friend does with his frend.
Whereat he wondred much, and gan enquere,
What stately building durst so high extend
Her loftie towres vnto the starry sphere,
And what vnknowen nation there empeopled were.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Faire knight (quoth he) Hierusalem that is,
The new Hierusalem, that God has built
For those to dwell in, that are chosen his,
His chosen people purg'd from sinfull guilt,
With pretious bloud, which cruelly was spilt
On cursed tree, of that vnspotted lam,
That for the sinnes of all the world was kilt:
Now are they Saints all in that Citie sam,
More deare vnto their God, then yoũglings to their dam.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Till now, said then the knight, I weened well,
That great Cleopolis, where I haue beene,
In which that fairest Faerie Queene doth dwell,
The fairest Citie was, that might be seene;
And that bright towre all built of christall cleene,
Panthea, seemd the brightest thing, that was:
But now by proofe all otherwise I weene;
For this great Citie that does far surpas,
And this bright Angels towre quite dims that towre of glas.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Most trew, then said the holy aged man;
Yet is Cleopolis for earthly frame,
The fairest peece, that eye beholden can:
And well beseemes all knights of noble name,
That couet in th'immortall booke of fame
To be eternized, that same to haunt,
And doen their seruice to that soueraigne Dame,
That glorie does to them for guerdon graunt:
For she is heauenly borne, and heauen may iustly vaunt.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And thou faire ymp, sprong out from English race,
How euer now accompted Elfins sonne,
Well worthy doest thy seruice for her grace,
To aide a virgin desolate foredonne.
But when thou famous victorie hast wonne,
And high emongst all knights hast hong thy shield,
Thenceforth the suit of earthly conquest shonne,
And wash thy hands from guilt of bloudy field:
For bloud can nought but sin, & wars but sorrowes yield.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then seeke this path, that I to thee presage,
Which after all to heauen shall thee send;
Then peaceably thy painefull pilgrimage
To yonder same Hierusalem do bend,
Where is for thee ordaind a blessed end:
For thou emongst those Saints, whom thou doest see,
Shalt be a Saint, and thine owne nations frend
And Patrone: thou Saint George shalt called bee,
Saint George of mery England, the signe of victoree.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vnworthy wretch (quoth he) of so great grace,
How dare I thinke such glory to attaine?
These that haue it attaind, were in like cace
(Quoth he) as wretched, and liu'd in like paine.
But deeds of armes must I at last be faine,
And Ladies loue to leaue so dearely bought?
What need of armes, where peace doth ay remaine,
(Said he) and battailes none are to be fought?
As for loose loues they are vaine, and vanish into nought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O let me not (quoth he) then turne againe
Backe to the world, whose ioyes so fruitlesse are;
But let me here for aye in peace remaine,
Or streight way on that last long voyage fare,
That nothing may my present hope empare.
That may not be (said he) ne maist thou yit
Forgo that royall maides bequeathed care,
Who did her cause into thy hand commit,
Till from her cursed foe thou haue her freely quit.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then shall I soone, (quoth he) so God me grace,
Abet that virgins cause disconsolate,
And shortly backe returne vnto this place,
To walke this way in Pilgrims poore estate.
But now aread, old father, why of late
Didst thou behight me borne of English blood,
Whom all a Faeries sonne doen nominate?
That word shall I (said he) auouchen good,
Sith to thee is vnknowne the cradle of thy brood.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For well I wote, thou springst from ancient race
Of Saxon kings, that haue with mightie hand
And many bloudie battailes fought in place
High reard their royall throne in Britane land,
And vanquisht them, vnable to withstand:
From thence a Faerie thee vnweeting reft,
There as thou slepst in tender swadling band,
And her base Elfin brood there for thee left.
Such men do Chaungelings call, so chaungd by Faeries theft.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thence she thee brought into this Faerie lond,
And in an heaped furrow did thee hyde,
Where thee a Ploughman all vnweeting fond,
As he his toylesome teme that way did guyde,
And brought thee vp in ploughmans state to byde,
Whereof Georgos he thee gaue to name;
Till prickt with courage, and thy forces pryde,
To Faery court thou cam'st to seeke for fame,
And proue thy puissaunt armes, as seemes thee best became.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O holy Sire (quoth he) how shall I quight
The many fauours I with thee haue found,
That hast my name and nation red aright,
And taught the way that does to heauen bound?
This said, adowne he looked to the ground,
To haue returnd, but dazed were his eyne,
Through passing brightnesse, which did quite cõfound
His feeble sence, and too exceeding shyne.
So darke are earthly things compard to things diuine.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last whenas himselfe he gan to find,
To Vna back he cast him to retire;
Who him awaited still with pensiue mind.
Great thankes and goodly meed to that good syre,
He thence departing gaue for his paines hyre.
So came to Vna, who him ioyd to see,
And after litle rest, gan him desire,
Of her aduenture mindfull for to bee.
So leaue they take of Coelia, and her daughters three.

TITLE Faerie Queene XI

RHYME a b a b

The knight with that old Dragon fights
two dayes incessantly:
The third him ouerthrowes, and gayns
most glorious victory.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

HIgh time now gan it wex for Vna faire,
To thinke of those her captiue Parents deare,
And their forwasted kingdome to repaire:
Whereto whenas they now approched neare,
With hartie words her knight she gan to cheare,
And in her modest manner thus bespake;
Deare knight, as deare, as euer knight was deare,
That all these sorrowes suffer for my sake,
High heauen behold the tedious toyle, ye for me take.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now are we come vnto my natiue soyle,
And to the place, where all our perils dwell;
Here haunts that feend, and does his dayly spoyle,
Therefore henceforth be at your keeping well,
And euer ready for your foeman fell.
The sparke of noble courage now awake,
And striue your excellent selfe to excell;
That shall ye euermore renowmed make,
Aboue all knights on earth, that batteill vndertake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And pointing forth, lo yonder is (said she)
The brasen towre in which my parents deare
For dread of that huge feend emprisond be
Whom I from far see on the walles appeare
Whose sight my feeble soule doth greatly cheare:
And on the top of all I do espye
The watchman wayting tydings glad to heare,
That ô my parents might I happily
Vnto you bring, to ease you of your misery.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

With that they heard a roaring hideous sound,
That all the ayre with terrour filled wide,
And seemd vneath to shake the stedfast ground.
Eftsoones that dreadfull Dragon they espide,
Where stretcht he lay vpon the sunny side
Of a great hill, himselfe like a great hill.
But all so soone, as he from far descride
Those glistring armes, that heauen with light did fill,
He rousd himselfe full blith, and hastned them vntill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then bad the knight his Lady yede aloofe,
And to an hill her selfe with draw aside,
From whence she might behold that battailles proof
And eke be safe from daunger far descryde:
She him obayd, and turnd a little wyde.
Now O thou sacred Muse, most learned Dame,
Faire ympe of Phoebus, and his aged bride,
The Nourse of time, and euerlasting fame,
That warlike hands ennoblest with immortall name;

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

O gently come into my feeble brest,
Come gently, but not with that mighty rage,
Wherewith the martiall troupes thou doest infest,
And harts of great Heroës doest enrage,
That nought their kindled courage may aswage,
Soone as thy dreadfull trompe begins to sownd;
The God of warre with his fiers equipage
Thou doest awake, sleepe neuer he so sownd,
And scared nations doest with horrour sterne astownd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Faire Goddesse lay that furious fit aside,
Till I of warres and bloudy Mars do sing,
And Briton fields with Sarazin bloud bedyde,
Twixt that great faery Queene and Paynim king,
That with their horrour heauen and earth did ring,
A worke of labour long, and endlesse prayse:
But now a while let downe that haughtie string,
And to my tunes thy second tenor rayse,
That I this man of God his godly armes may blaze.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

By this the dreadfull Beast drew nigh to hand,
Halfe flying, and halfe footing in his hast,
That with his largenesse measured much land,
And made wide shadow vnder his huge wast;
As mountaine doth the valley ouercast.
Approching nigh, he reared high afore
His body monstrous, horrible, and vast,
Which to increase his wondrous greatnesse more,
Was swolne with wrath, & poyson, & with bloudy gore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And ouer, all with brasen scales was armd,
Like plated coate of steele, so couched neare,
That nought mote perce, ne might his corse be harmd
With dint of sword, nor push of pointed speare;
Which as an Eagle, seeing pray appeare,
His aery plumes doth rouze, full rudely dight,
So shaked he, that horrour was to heare,
For as the clashing of an Armour bright,
Such noyse his rouzed scales did send vnto the knight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His flaggy wings when forth he did display,
Were like two sayles, in which the hollow wynd
Is gathered full, and worketh speedy way:
And eke the pennes, that did his pineons bynd,
Were like mayne-yards, with flying canuas lynd,
With which whenas him list the ayre to beat,
And there by force vnwonted passage find,
The cloudes before him fled for terrour great,
And all the heauens stood still amazed with his threat.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His huge long tayle wound vp in hundred foldes,
Does ouerspred his long bras-scaly backe,
Whose wreathed boughts when euer he vnfoldes,
And thicke entangled knots adown does slacke.
Bespotted all with shields of red and blacke,
It sweepeth all the land behind him farre,
And of three furlongs does but litle lacke;
And at the point two stings in-fixed arre,
Both deadly sharpe, that sharpest steele exceeden farre.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But stings and sharpest steele did far exceed
The sharpnesse of his cruell rending clawes;
Dead was it sure, as sure as death in deed,
What euer thing does touch his rauenous pawes,
Or what within his reach he euer drawes.
But his most hideous head my toung to tell
Does tremble: for his deepe deuouring iawes
Wide gaped, like the griesly mouth of hell,
Through which into his darke abisse all rauin fell.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And that more wondrous was, in either iaw
Three ranckes of yron teeth enraunged were,
In which yet trickling bloud and gobbets raw
Of late deuoured bodies did appeare,
That sight thereof bred cold congealed feare:
Which to increase, and as atonce to kill,
A cloud of smoothering smoke and sulphur seare
Out of his stinking gorge forth steemed still,
That all the ayre about with smoke and stench did fill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His blazing eyes, like two bright shining shields,
Did burne with wrath, and sparkled liuing fyre;
As two broad Beacons, set in open fields,
Send forth their flames farre off to euery shyre,
And warning giue, that enemies conspyre,
With fire and sword the region to inuade;
So flam'd his eyne with rage and rancorous yre:
But farre within, as in a hollow glade,
Those glaring lampes were set, that made a dreadfull shade.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So dreadfully he towards him did pas,
Forelifting vp aloft his speckled brest,
And often bounding on the brused gras,
As for great ioyance of his newcome guest.
Eftsoones he gan aduance his haughtie crest,
As chauffed Bore his bristles doth vpreare,
And shoke his scales to battell readie drest;
That made the Redcrosse knight nigh quake for feare,
As bidding bold defiance to his foeman neare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight gan fairely couch his steadie speare,
And fiercely ran at him with rigorous might:
The pointed steele arriuing rudely theare,
His harder hide would neither perce, nor bight,
But glauncing by forth passed forward right;
Yet sore amoued with so puissant push,
The wrathfull beast about him turned light,
And him so rudely passing by, did brush
With his long tayle, that horse and man to ground did rush.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Both horse and man vp lightly rose againe,
And fresh encounter towards him addrest:
But th'idle stroke yet backe recoyld in vaine,
And found no place his deadly point to rest.
Exceeding rage enflam'd the furious beast,
To be auenged of so great despight;
For neuer felt his imperceable brest
So wondrous force, from hand of liuing wight;
Yet had he prou'd the powre of many a puissant knight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then with his wauing wings displayed wyde,
Himselfe vp high he lifted from the ground,
And with strong flight did forcibly diuide
The yielding aire, which nigh too feeble found
Her flitting partes, and element vnsound,
To beare so great a weight: he cutting way
With his broad sayles, about him soared round:
At last low stouping with vnweldie sway,
Snatcht vp both horse & man, to beare them quite away.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Long he them bore aboue the subiect plaine,
So farre as Ewghen bow a shaft may send,
Till struggling strong did him at last constraine,
To let them downe before his flightes end:
As hagard hauke presuming to contend
With hardie fowle, aboue his hable might,
His wearie pounces all in vaine doth spend,
To trusse the pray too heauie for his flight;
Which comming downe to ground, does free it selfe by fight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He so disseized of his gryping grosse,
The knight his thrillant speare againe assayd
In his bras-plated body to embosse,
And three mens strength vnto the stroke he layd;
Wherewith the stiffe beame quaked, as affrayd,
And glauncing from his scaly necke, did glyde
Close vnder his left wing, then broad displayd.
The percing steele there wrought a wound full wyde,
That with the vncouth smart the Monster lowdly cryde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

He cryde, as raging seas are wont to rore,
When wintry storme his wrathfull wreck does threat,
The rolling billowes beat the ragged shore,
As they the earth would shoulder from her seat,
And greedie gulfe does gape, as he would eat
His neighbour element in his reuenge:
Then gin the blustring brethren boldly threat,
To moue the world from off his stedfast henge,
And boystrous battell make, each other to auenge.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The steely head stucke fast still in his flesh,
Till with his cruell clawes he snatcht the wood,
And quite a sunder broke. Forth flowed fresh
A gushing riuer of blacke goarie blood,
That drowned all the land, whereon he stood;
The streame thereof would driue a water-mill.
Trebly augmented was his furious mood
With bitter sense of his deepe rooted ill,
That flames of fire he threw forth frõ his large nosethrill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His hideous tayle then hurled he about,
And therewith all enwrapt the nimble thyes
Of his froth-fomy steed, whose courage stout
Striuing to loose the knot, that fast him tyes,
Himselfe in streighter bandes too rash implyes,
That to the ground he is perforce constraynd
To throw his rider: who can quickly ryse
From off the earth, with durty bloud distaynd,
For that reprochfull fall right fowly he disdaynd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And fiercely tooke his trenchand blade in hand,
With which he stroke so furious and so fell,
That nothing seemd the puissance could withstand:
Vpon his crest the hardned yron fell,
But his more hardned crest was armd so well,
That deeper dint therein it would not make;
Yet so extremely did the buffe him quell,
That from thenceforth he shund the like to take,
But when he saw them come, he did them still forsake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight was wrath to see his stroke beguyld,
And smote againe with more outrageous might;
But backe againe the sparckling steele recoyld,
And left not any marke, where it did light;
As if in Adamant rocke it had bene pight.
The beast impatient of his smarting wound,
And of so fierce and forcible despight,
Thought with his wings to stye aboue the ground;
But his late wounded wing vnseruiceable found.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then full of griefe and anguish vehement,
He lowdly brayd, that like was neuer heard,
And from his wide deuouring ouen sent
A flake of fire, that flashing in his beard,
Him all amazd, and almost made affeard:
The scorching flame sore swinged all his face,
And through his armour all his bodie seard,
That he could not endure so cruell cace,
But thought his armes to leaue, and helmet to vnlace.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Not that great Champion of the antique world,
Whom famous Poetes verse so much doth vaunt,
And hath for twelue huge labours high extold,
So many furies and sharpe fits did haunt,
When him the poysoned garment did enchaunt
With Centaures bloud, and bloudie verses charm'd,
As did this knight twelue thousand dolours daunt,
Whom fyrie steele now burnt, that earst him arm'd,
That erst him goodly arm'd, now most of all him harm'd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Faint, wearie, sore, emboyled, grieued, brent
With heat, toyle, wounds, armes, smart, & inward fire
That neuer man such mischiefes did torment;
Death better were, death did he oft desire,
But death will neuer come, when needes require.
Whom so dismayd when that his foe beheld,
He cast to suffer him no more respire,
But gan his sturdie sterne about to weld,
And him so strongly stroke, that to the ground him feld.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

It fortuned (as faire it then befell)
Behind his backe vnweeting, where he stood,
Of auncient time there was a springing well,
From which fast trickled forth a siluer flood,
Full of great vertues, and for med'cine good.
Whylome, before that cursed Dragon got
That happie land, and all with innocent blood
Defyld those sacred waues, it rightly hot
The well of life, ne yet his vertues had forgot.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For vnto life the dead it could restore,
And guilt of sinfull crimes cleane wash away,
Those that with sicknesse were infected sore,
It could recure, and aged long decay
Renew, as one were borne that very day.
Both Silo this, and Iordan did excell,
And th'English Bath, and eke the german Spau,
Ne can Cephise, nor Hebrus match this well:
Into the same the knight backe ouerthrowen, fell.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now gan the golden Phoebus for to steepe
His fierie face in billowes of the west,
And his faint steedes watred in Ocean deepe,
Whiles from their iournall labours they did rest,
When that infernall Monster, hauing kest
His wearie foe into that liuing well,
Can high aduance his broad discoloured brest,
Aboue his wonted pitch, with countenance fell,
And clapt his yron wings, as victor he did dwell.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which when his pensiue Ladie saw from farre,
Great woe and sorrow did her soule assay,
As weening that the sad end of the warre,
And gan to highest God entirely pray,
That feared chance from her to turne away;
With folded hands and knees full lowly bent
All night she watcht, ne once adowne would lay
Her daintie limbs in her sad dreriment,
But praying still did wake, and waking did lament.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The morrow next gan early to appeare,
That Titan rose to runne his daily race:
But early ere the morrow next gan reare
Out of the sea faire Titans deawy face,
Vp rose the gentle virgin from her place,
And looked all about, if she might spy
Her loued knight to moue his manly pace:
For she had great doubt of his safety,
Since late she saw him fall before his enemy.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

At last she where he vpstarted braue
Out of the well, wherein he drenched lay;
As Eagle fresh out of the Ocean waue,
Where he hath left his plumes all hoary gray,
And deckt himselfe with feathers youthly gay,
Like Eyas hauke vp mounts vnto the skies,
His newly budded pineons to assay,
And marueiles at himselfe, still as he flies:
So new this new-borne knight to battell new did rise.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Whom when the damned feend so fresh did spy,
No wonder if he wondred at the sight,
And doubted, whether his late enemy
It were, or other new supplied knight.
He, now to proue his late renewed might,
High brandishing his bright deaw-burning blade,
Vpon his crested scalpe so sore did smite,
That to the scull a yawning wound it made:
The deadly dint his dulled senses all dismaid.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

I wote not, whether the reuenging steele
Were hardned with that holy water dew,
Wherein he fell, or sharper edge did feele,
Or his baptized hands now greater grew;
Or other secret vertue did ensew;
Else neuer could the force of fleshly arme,
Ne molten mettall in his bloud embrew:
For till that stownd could neuer wight him harme,
By subtilty, nor slight, nor might, nor mighty charme.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The cruell wound enraged him so sore,
That loud he yelded for exceeding paine;
As hundred ramping Lyons seem'd to rore,
Whom rauenous hunger did thereto constraine:
Then gan he tosse aloft his stretched traine,
And therewith scourge the buxome aire so sore,
That to his force to yeelden it was faine;
Ne ought his sturdie strokes might stand afore,
That high trees ouerthrew, and rocks in peeces tore.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The same aduauncing high aboue his head,
With sharpe intended sting so rude him smot,
That to the earth him droue, as stricken dead,
Ne liuing wight would haue him life behot:
The mortall sting his angry needle shot
Quite through his shield, and in his shoulder seasd,
Where fast it stucke, ne would there out be got:
The griefe thereof him wondrous sore diseasd,
Ne might his ranckling paine with patience be appeasd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But yet more mindfull of his honour deare,
Then of the grieuous smart, which him did wring,
From loathed soile he can him lightly reare,
And stroue to loose the farre infixed sting:
Which when in vaine he tryde with struggeling.
Inflam'd with wrath, his raging blade he heft,
And.strooke so strongly, that the knotty string
Of his huge taile he quite a sunder cleft,
Fiue ioynts thereof he hewd, and but the stump him left.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Hart cannot thinke, what outrage, and what cryes,
With foule enfouldred smoake and flashing fire,
The hell-bred beast threw forth vnto the skyes,
That all was couered with darknesse dire:
Then fraught with rancour, and engorged ire,
He cast at once him to auenge for all,
And gathering vp himselfe out of the mire,
With his vneuen wings did fiercely fall
Vpon his sunne-bright shield, and gript it fast withall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Much was the man encombred with his hold,
In feare to lose his weapon in his paw,
Ne wist yet, how his talants to vnfold;
Nor harder was from Cerberus greedie iaw
To plucke a bone, then from his cruell claw
To reaue by strength the griped gage away:
Thrise he assayd it from his foot to draw,
And thrise in vaine to draw it did assay,
It booted nought to thinke, to robbe him of his pray.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Tho when he saw no power might preuaile,
His trustie sword he cald to his last aid,
Wherewith he fiercely did his foe assaile,
And double blowes about him stoutly laid,
That glauncing fire out of the yron plaid;
As sparckles from the Anduile vse to fly,
When heauie hammers on the wedge are swaid;
Therewith at last he forst him to vnty
One of his grasping feete, him to defend thereby.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The other foot, fast fixed on his shield,
Whenas no strength, nor stroks mote him constraine
To loose, ne yet the warlike pledge to yield,
He smot thereat with all his might and maine,
That nought so wondrous puissance might sustaine;
Vpon the ioynt the lucky steele did light,
And made such way, that hewd it quite in twaine;
The paw yet missed not his minisht might,
But hong still on the shield, as it at first was pight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For griefe thereof, and diuelish despight,
From his infernall fournace forth he threw
Huge flames, that dimmed all the heauens light,
Enrold in duskish smoke and brimstone blew;
As burning Aetna from his boyling stew
Doth belch out flames, and rockes in peeces broke,
And ragged ribs of mountaines molten new,
Enwrapt in coleblacke clouds and filthy smoke,
That all the land with stench, and heauen with horror choke.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The heate whereof, and harmefull pestilence
So sore him noyd, that forst him to retire
A little backward for his best defence,
To saue his bodie from the scorching fire,
Which he from hellish entrailes did expire.
It chaunst (eternall God that chaunce did guide)
As he recoyled backward, in the mire
His nigh forwearied feeble feet did slide,
And downe he fell, with dread of shame sore terrifide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There grew a goodly tree him faire beside,
Loaden with fruit and apples rosie red,
As they in pure vermilion had beene dide,
Whereof great vertues ouer all were red:
For happie life to all, which thereon fed,
And life eke euerlasting did befall:
Great God it planted in that blessed sted
With his almightie hand, and did it call
The tree of life, the crime of our first fathers fall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

In all the world like was not to be found,
Saue in that soile, where all good things did grow,
And freely sprong out of the fruitfull ground,
As incorrupted Nature did them sow,
Till that dread Dragon all did ouerthrow.
Another like faire tree eke grew thereby,
Whereof who so did eat, eftsoones did know
Both good and ill: O mornefull memory:
That tree through one mans fault hath doen vs all to dy.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

From that first tree forth flowd, as from a well,
A trickling streame of Balme, most soueraine
And daintie deare, which on the ground still fell,
And ouerflowed all the fertill plaine,
As it had deawed bene with timely raine:
Life and long health that gratious ointment gaue,
And deadly woundes could heale, and reare againe
The senselesse corse appointed for the graue.
Into that same he fell: which did from death him saue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

For nigh thereto the euer damned beast
Durst not approch, for he was deadly made,
And all that life preserued, did detest:
Yet he it oft aduentur'd to inuade.
By this the drouping day-light gan to fade
And yeeld his roome to sad succeeding night,
Who with her sable mantle gan to shade
The face of earth, and wayes of liuing wight,
And high her burning torch set vp in heauen bright.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

When gentle Vna saw the second fall
Of her deare knight, who wearie of long fight,
And faint through losse of bloud, mou'd not at all,
But lay as in a dreame of deepe delight,
Besmeard with pretious Balme, whose vertuous might
Did heale his wounds, and scorching heat alay,
Againe she stricken was with sore affright,
And for his safetie gan deuoutly pray;
And watch the noyous night, and wait for ioyous day.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The ioyous day gan early to appeare,
And faire Aurora from the deawy bed
Of aged Tithone gan her selfe to reare,
With rosie cheekes, for shame as blushing red;
Her golden lockes for haste were loosely shed
About her eares, when Vna her did marke
Clymbe to her charet, all with flowers spred;
From heauen high to chase the chearelesse darke,
With merry note her loud salutes the mounting larke.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then freshly vp arose the doughtie knight,
All healed of his hurts and woundes wide,
And did himselfe to battell readie dight;
Whose early foe awaiting him beside
To haue deuourd, so soone as day he spyde,
When now he saw himselfe so freshly reare,
As if late fight had nought him damnifyde,
He woxe dismayd, and gan his fate to feare;
Nathlesse with wonted rage he him aduaunced neare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And in his first encounter, gaping wide,
He thought attonce him to haue swallowd quight,
And rusht vpon him with outragious pride;
Who him r'encountring fierce, as hauke in flight,
Perforce rebutted backe. The weapon bright
Taking aduantage of his open iaw,
Ran through his mouth with so importune might,
That deepe emperst his darksome hollow maw,
And back retyrd, his life bloud forth with all did draw.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So downe he fell, and forth his life did breath,
That vanisht into smoke and cloudes swift;
So downe he fell, that th'earth him vnderneath
Did grone, as feeble so great load to lift;
So downe he fell, as an huge rockie clift,
Whose false foundation waues haue washt away,
With dreadfull poyse is from the mayneland rift,
And rolling downe, great Neptune doth dismay;
So downe he fell, and like an heaped mountaine lay.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The knight himselfe euen trembled at his fall,
So huge and horrible a masse it seem'd;
And his deare Ladie, that beheld it all,
Durst not approch for dread, which she misdeem'd,
But yet at last, when as the direfull feend
She saw not stirre, off-shaking vaine affright,
She nigher drew, and saw that ioyous end:
Then God she praysd, and thankt her faithfull knight,
That had atchieu'd so great a conquest by his might.

TITLE Faerie Queene XII

RHYME a b a b

Faire Vna to the Redcrosse knight
betrouthed is with ioy:
Though false Duessa it to barre
her false sleights doe imploy.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

BEhold I see the hauen nigh at hand,
To which I meane my wearie course to bend;
Vere the maine shete, and beare vp with the land,
The which afore is fairely to be kend,
And seemeth safe from stormes, that may offend;
There this faire virgin wearie of her way
Must landed be, now at her iourneyes end:
There eke my feeble barke a while may stay,
Till merry wind and weather call her thence away.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Scarsely had Phoebus in the glooming East
Yet harnessed his firie-footed teeme,
Ne reard aboue the earth his flaming creast,
When the last deadly smoke aloft did steeme,
That signe of last outbreathed life did seeme,
Vnto the watchman on the castle wall;
Who thereby dead that balefull Beast did deeme,
And to his Lord and Ladie lowd gan call,
To tell, how he had seene the Dragons fatall fall.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vprose with hastie ioy, and feeble speed
That aged Sire, the Lord of all that land,
And looked forth, to weet, if true indeede
Those tydings were, as he did vnderstand,
Which whenas true by tryall he out fond,
He bad to open wyde his brazen gate,
Which long time had bene shut, and out of hond
Proclaymed ioy and peace through all his state;
For dead now was their foe, which them forrayed late.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then gan triumphant Trompets sound on hie,
That sent to heauen the ecchoed report
Of their new ioy, and happie victorie
Gainst him, that had them long opprest with tort,
And fast imprisoned in sieged fort.
Then all the people, as in solemne feast,
To him assembled with one full consort,
Reioycing at the fall of that great beast,
From whose eternall bondage now they were releast.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Forth came that auncient Lord and aged Queene,
Arayd in antique robes downe to the ground,
And sad habiliments right well beseene;
A noble crew about them waited round
Of sage and sober Peres, all grauely gownd;
Whom farre before did march a goodly band
Of tall young men, all hable armes to sownd,
But now they laurell braunches bore in hand;
Glad signe of victorie and peace in all their land.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vnto that doughtie Conquerour they came,
And him before themselues prostrating low,
Their Lord and Patrone loud did him proclame,
And at his feet their laurell boughes did throw.
Soone after them all dauncing on a row
The comely virgins came, with girlands dight,
As fresh as flowres in medow greene do grow,
When morning deaw vpon their leaues doth light:
And in their hands sweet Timbrels all vpheld on hight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And them before, the fry of children young
Their wanton sports and childish mirth did play,
And to the Maydens sounding tymbrels sung
In well attuned notes, a ioyous lay,
And made delightfull musicke all the way,
Vntill they came, where that faire virgin stood;
As faire Diana in fresh sommers day
Beholds her Nymphes, enraung'd in shadie wood,
Some wrestle, some do run, some bathe in christall flood.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So she beheld those maydens meriment
With chearefull vew; who when to her they came,
Themselues to ground with gratious humblesse bent,
And her ador'd by honorable name,
Lifting to heauen her euerlasting fame:
Then on her head they set a girland greene,
And crowned her twixt earnest and twixt game;
Who in her selfe-resemblance well beseene,
Did seeme such, as she was, a goodly maiden Queene.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And after, all the raskall many ran,
Heaped together in rude rablement
To see the face of that victorious man:
Whom all admired, as from heauen sent,
And gazd vpon with gaping wonderment.
But when they came, where that dead Dragon lay,
Stretcht on the ground in monstrous large extent,
The sight with idle feare did them dismay,
Ne durst approch him nigh, to touch, or once assay.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Some feard, and fled; some feard and well it faynd;
One that would wiser seeme, then all the rest,
Warnd him not touch, for yet perhaps remaynd
Some lingring life within his hollow brest,
Or in his wombe might lurke some hidden nest
Of many Dragonets, his fruitfull seed;
Another said, that in his eyes did rest
Yet sparckling fire, and bad thereof take heed;
Another said, he saw him moue his eyes indeed.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

One mother, when as her foolehardie chyld
Did come too neare, and with his talants play,
Halfe dead through feare, her litle babe reuyld,
And to her gossips gan in counsell say;
How can I tell, but that his talants may
Yet scratch my sonne, or rend his tender hand?
So diuersly themselues in vaine they fray;
Whiles some more bold, to measure him nigh stand,
To proue how many acres he did spread of land.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Thus flocked all the folke him round about,
The whiles that hoarie king, with all his traine,
Being arriued, where that champion stout
After his foes defeasance did remaine,
Him goodly greetes, and faire does entertaine,
With princely gifts of yuorie and gold,
And thousand thankes him yeelds for all his paine.
Then when his daughter deare he does behold,
Her dearely doth imbrace, and kisseth manifold.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And after to his Pallace he them brings,
With shaumes, & trompets, & with Clarions sweet;
And all the way the ioyous people sings,
And with their garments strowes the paued street:
Whence mounting vp, they find purueyance meet
Of all, that royall Princes court became,
And all the floore was vnderneath their feet
Bespred with costly scarlot of great name,
On which they lowly sit, and fitting purpose frame.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

What needs me tell their feast and goodly guize,
In which was nothing riotous nor vaine?
What needs of daintie dishes to deuize,
Of comely seruices, or courtly trayne?
My narrow leaues cannot in them containe
The large discourse of royall Princes state.
Yet was their manner then but bare and plaine:
For th'antique world excesse and pride did hate;
Such proud luxurious pompe is swollen vp but late.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then when with meates and drinkes of euery kinde
Their feruent appetites they quenched had,
That auncient Lord gan fit occasion finde,
Of straunge aduentures, and of perils sad,
Which in his trauell him befallen had,
For to demaund of his renowmed guest:
Who then with vtt'rance graue, and count'nance sad
From point to point, as is before exprest,
Discourst his voyage long, according his request.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Great pleasure mixt with pittifull regard,
That godly King and Queene did passionate,
Whiles they his pittifull aduentures heard,
That oft they did lament his lucklesse state,
And often blame the too importune fate,
That heapd on him so many wrathfull wreakes:
For neuer gentle knight, as he of late,
So tossed was in fortunes cruell freakes;
And all the while salt teares bedeawd the hearers cheaks.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then said that royall Pere in sober wise;
Deare Sonne, great beene the euils, which ye bore
From first to last in your late enterprise,
That I note, whether prayse, or pitty more:
For neuer liuing man, I weene, so sore
In sea of deadly daungers was distrest;
But since now safe ye seised haue the shore,
And well arriued are, (high God be blest)
Let vs deuize of ease and euerlasting rest.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Ah dearest Lord, said then that doughty knight,
Of ease or rest I may not yet deuize;
For by the faith, which I to armes haue plight,
I bounden am streight after this emprize,
As that your daughter can ye well aduize,
Backe to returne to that great Faerie Queene,
And her to serue six yeares in warlike wize,
Gainst that proud Paynim king, that workes her teene:
Therefore I ought craue pardon, till I there haue beene.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Vnhappie falles that hard necessitie,
(Quoth he) the troubler of my happie peace,
And vowed foe of my felicitie;
Ne I against the same can iustly preace:
But since that band ye cannot now release,
Nor doen vndo; (for vowes may not be vaine)
Soone as the terme of those six yeares shall cease,
Ye then shall hither backe returne againe,
The marriage to accomplish vowd betwixt you twain.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Which for my part I couet to performe,
In sort as through the world I did proclame,
That who so kild that monster most deforme,
And him in hardy battaile ouercame,
Should haue mine onely daughter to his Dame,
And of my kingdome heire apparaunt bee:
Therefore since now to thee perteines the same,
By dew desert of noble cheualree,
Both daughter and eke kingdome, lo I yield to thee.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then forth he called that his daughter faire,
The fairest Vn' his onely daughter deare,
His onely daughter, and his onely heyre;
Who forth proceeding with sad sober cheare,
As bright as doth the morning starre appeare
Out of the East, with flaming lockes bedight,
To tell that dawning day is drawing neare,
And to the world does bring long wished light;
So faire and fresh that Lady shewd her selfe in sight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So faire and fresh, as freshest flowre in May;
For she had layd her mournefull stole aside,
And widow-like sad wimple throwne away,
Wherewith her heauenly beautie she did hide,
Whiles on her wearie iourney she did ride;
And on her now a garment she did weare,
All lilly white, withoutten spot, or pride,
That seemd like silke and siluer wouen neare,
But neither silke nor siluer therein did appeare.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The blazing brightnesse of her beauties beame,
And glorious light of her sunshyny face
To tell, were as to striue against the streame.
My ragged rimes are all too rude and bace,
Her heauenly lineaments for to enchace.
Ne wonder; for her owne deare loued knight,
All were she dayly with himselfe in place,
Did wonder much at her celestiall sight:
Oft had he seene her faire, but neuer so faire dight.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

So fairely dight, when she in presence came,
She to her Sire made humble reuerence,
And bowed low, that her right well became,
And added grace vnto her excellence:
Who with great wisedome, and graue eloquence
Thus gan to say. But eare he thus had said,
With flying speede, and seeming great pretence,
Came running in, much like a man dismaid,
A Messenger with letters, which his message said.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

All in the open hall amazed stood,
At suddeinnesse of that vnwarie sight,
And wondred at his breathlesse hastie mood.
But he for nought would stay his passage right,
Till fast before the king he did alight;
Where falling flat, great humblesse he did make,
And kist the ground, whereon his foot was pight;
Then to his hands that writ he did betake,
Which he disclosing, red thus, as the paper spake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

To thee, most mighty king of Eden faire,
Her greeting sends in these sad lines addrest,
The wofull daughter, and forsaken heire
Of that great Emperour of all the West;
And bids thee be aduized for the best,
Ere thou thy daughter linck in holy band
Of wedlocke to that new vnknowen guest:
For he already plighted his right hand
Vnto another loue, and to another land.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

To me sad mayd, or rather widow sad,
He was affiaunced long time before,
And sacred pledges he both gaue, and had,
False erraunt knight, infamous, and forswore:
Witnesse the burning Altars, which he swore,
And guiltie heauens of his bold periury,
Which though he hath polluted oft of yore,
Yet I to them for iudgement iust do fly,
And them coniure t'auenge this shamefull iniury.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Therefore since mine he is, or free or bond,
Or false or trew, or liuing or else dead,
Withhold, O soueraine Prince, your hasty hond
From knitting league with him, I you aread;
Ne weene my right with strength adowne to tread,
Through weakenesse of my widowhed, or woe:
For truth is strong, her rightfull cause to plead,
And shall find friends, if need requireth soe,
So bids thee well to fare, Thy neither friend, nor foe, Fidessa.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

When he these bitter byting words had red,
The tydings straunge did him abashed make,
That still he sate long time astonished
As in great muse, ne word to creature spake.
At last his solemne silence thus he brake,
With doubtfull eyes fast fixed on his guest;
Redoubted knight, that for mine onely sake
Thy life and honour late aduenturest,
Let nought be hid from me, that ought to be exprest.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

What meane these bloudy vowes, and idle threats,
Throwne out from womanish impatient mind?
What heauens? what altars? what enraged heates
Here heaped vp with termes of loue vnkind,
My conscience cleare with guilty bands would bind?
High God be witnesse, that I guiltlesse ame.
But if your selfe, Sir knight, ye faultie find,
Or wrapped be in loues of former Dame,
With crime do not it couer, but disclose the same.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

To whom the Redcrosse knight this answere sent,
My Lord, my King, be nought hereat dismayd,
Till well ye wote by graue intendiment,
What woman, and wherefore doth me vpbrayd
With breach of loue, and loyalty betrayd.
It was in my mishaps, as hitherward
I lately traueild, that vnwares I strayd
Out of my way, through perils straunge and hard;
That day should faile me, ere I had them all declard.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

There did I find, or rather I was found
Of this false woman, that Fidessa hight,
Fidessa hight the falsest Dame on ground,
Most false Duessa, royall richly dight,
That easie was t'inuegle weaker sight:
Who by her wicked arts, and wylie skill,
Too false and strong for earthly skill or might,
Vnwares me wrought vnto her wicked will,
And to my foe betrayd, when least I feared ill.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then stepped forth the goodly royall Mayd,
And on the ground her selfe prostrating low,
With sober countenaunce thus to him sayd;
O pardon me, my soueraigne Lord, to show
The secret treasons, which of late I know
To haue bene wroght by that false sorceresse.
She onely she it is, that earst did throw
This gentle knight into so great distresse,
That death him did awaite in dayly wretchednesse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

And now it seemes, that she suborned hath
This craftie messenger with letters vaine,
To worke new woe and improuided scath,
By breaking of the band betwixt vs twaine;
Wherein she vsed hath the practicke paine
Of this false footman, clokt with simplenesse,
Whom if ye please for to discouer plaine,
Ye shall him Archimago find, I ghesse,
The falsest man aliue; who tries shall find no lesse.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

The king was greatly moued at her speach,
And all with suddein indignation fraight,
Bad on that Messenger rude hands to reach.
Eftsoones the Gard, which on his state did wait,
Attacht that faitor false, and bound him strait:
Who seeming sorely chauffed at his band,
As chained Beare, whom cruell dogs do bait,
With idle force did faine them to withstand,
And often semblaunce made to scape out of their hand.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

But they him layd full low in dungeon deepe,
And bound him hand and foote with yron chains.
And with continuall watch did warely keepe;
Who then would thinke, that by his subtile trains
He could escape fowle death or deadly paines?
Thus when that Princes wrath was pacifide,
He gan renew the late forbidden banes,
And to the knight his daughter deare he tyde,
With sacred rites and vowes for euer to abyde.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

His owne two hands the holy knots did knit,
That none but death for euer can deuide;
His owne two hands, for such a turne most fit,
The housling fire did kindle and prouide,
And holy water thereon sprinckled wide;
At which the bushy Teade a groome did light,
And sacred lampe in secret chamber hide,
Where it should not be quenched day nor night,
For feare of euill fates, but burnen euer bright.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Then gan they sprinckle all the posts with wine,
And made great feast to solemnize that day;
They all perfumde with frankincense diuine,
And precious odours fetcht from far away,
That all the house did sweat with great aray:
And all the while sweete Musicke did apply
Her curious skill, the warbling notes to play,
To driue away the dull Melancholy;
The whiles one sung a song of loue and iollity.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

During the which there was an heauenly noise
Heard sound through all the Pallace pleasantly,
Like as it had bene many an Angels voice,
Singing before th'eternall maiesty,
In their trinall triplicities on hye;
Yet wist no creature, whence that heauenly sweet
Proceeded, yet each one felt secretly
Himselfe thereby reft of his sences meet,
And rauished with rare impression in his sprite.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Great ioy was made that day of young and old,
And solemne feast proclaimd throughout the land,
That their exceeding merth may not be told:
Suffice it heare by signes to vnderstand
The vsuall ioyes at knitting of loues band.
Thrise happy man the knight himselfe did hold,
Possessed of his Ladies hart and hand,
And euer, when his eye did her behold,
His heart did seeme to melt in pleasures manifold.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Her ioyous presence and sweet company
In full content he there did long enioy,
Ne wicked enuie, ne vile gealosy
His deare delights were able to annoy:
Yet swimming in that sea of blisfull ioy,
He nought forgot, how he whilome had sworne,
In case he could that monstrous beast destroy,
Vnto his Farie Queene backe to returne:
The which he shortly did, and Vna left to mourne.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c

Now strike your sailes ye iolly Mariners,
For we be come vnto a quiet rode,
Where we must land some of our passengers,
And light this wearie vessell of her lode.
Here she a while may make her safe abode,
Till she repaired haue her tackles spent,
And wants supplide. And then againe abroad
On the long voyage whereto she is bent:
Well may she speede and fairely finish her intent.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c d c d e e

    Wonder of these, glory of other times,
      O thou whom envy ev'n is forced t'admire!
      Great Patroness of these my humble rhymes,
      Which thou from out thy greatness dost inspire!
    Since only thou has deigned to raise them higher,
      Vouchsafe now to accept them as thine own,
      Begotten by thy hand and my desire,
      Wherein my zeal and thy great might is shown.
    And seeing this unto the world is known,
      O leave not still to grace thy work in me;
      Let not the quickening seed be overthrown
      Of that which may be born to honor thee,
    Whereof the travail I may challenge mine,
    But yet the glory, Madam, must be thine!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Unto the boundless ocean of thy beauty
      Runs this poor river, charged with streams of zeal,
      Returning thee the tribute of my duty,
      Which here my love, my youth, my plaints reveal.
    Here I unclasp the book of my charged soul,
      Where I have cast th' accounts of all my care;
      Here have I summed my sighs. Here I enrol
      How they were spent for thee. Look, what they are.
    Look on the dear expenses of my youth,
      And see how just I reckon with thine eyes.
      Examine well thy beauty with my truth,
      And cross my cares ere greater sums arise.
    Read it, sweet maid, though it be done but slightly;
    Who can show all his love, doth love but lightly.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Go, wailing verse, the infants of my love,
      Minerva-like, brought forth without a mother;
      Present the image of the cares I prove,
      Witness your father's grief exceeds all other.
    Sigh out a story of her cruel deeds,
      With interrupted accents of despair;
      A monument that whosoever reads,
      May justly praise and blame my loveless Fair;
    Say her disdain hath dried up my blood,
      And starved you, in succours still denying;
      Press to her eyes, importune me some good,
      Waken her sleeping pity with your crying:
    Knock at her hard heart, beg till you have moved her,
    And tell th'unkind how dearly I have loved her.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If so it hap this offspring of my care,
      These fatal anthems, lamentable songs,
      Come to their view, who like afflicted are;
      Let them yet sigh their own, and moan my wrongs.
    But untouched hearts with unaffected eye,
      Approach not to behold my soul's distress;
      Clear-sighted you soon note what is awry,
      Whilst blinded souls mine errors never guess.
    You blinded souls, whom youth and error lead;
      You outcast eaglets dazzled with your sun,
      Do you, and none but you, my sorrows read;
      You best can judge the wrongs that she hath done,
    That she hath done, the motive of my pain,
    Who whilst I love doth kill me with disdain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    These plaintive verse, the posts of my desire,
      Which haste for succour to her slow regard,
      Bear not report of any slender fire,
      Forging a grief to win a fame's reward.
    Nor are my passions limned for outward hue,
      For that no colours can depaint my sorrows;
      Delia herself, and all the world may view
      Best in my face where cares have tilled deep furrows.
    No bays I seek to deck my mourning brow,
      O clear-eyed rector of the holy hill!
      My humble accents bear the olive bough
      Of intercession but to move her will.
    These lines I use t'unburden mine own heart;
    My love affects no fame nor 'steems of art.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Whilst youth and error led my wandering mind,
      And set my thoughts in heedless ways to range,
      All unawares a goddess chaste I find,
      Diana-like, to work my sudden change.
    For her, no sooner had mine eye bewrayed,
      But with disdain to see me in that place,
      With fairest hand the sweet unkindest maid
      Casts water-cold disdain upon my face.
    Which turned my sport into a hart's despair,
      Which still is chased, while I have any breath,
      By mine own thoughts set on me by my Fair.
      My thoughts like hounds pursue me to my death;
    Those that I fostered of mine own accord,
    Are made by her to murder thus their lord.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Fair is my love, and cruel as she's fair;
      Her brow shades frowns although her eyes are sunny;
      Her smiles are lightning though her pride despair;
      And her disdains are gall, her favours honey;
    A modest maid, decked with a blush of honour,
      Whose feet do tread green paths of youth and love;
      The wonder of all eyes that look upon her,
      Sacred on earth, designed a saint above.
    Chastity and beauty, which were deadly foes,
      Live reconciled friends within her brow;
      And had she pity to conjoin with those,
      Then who had heard the plaints I utter now?
    O had she not been fair and thus unkind,
    My Muse had slept and none had known my mind!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    For had she not been fair and thus unkind,
      Then had no finger pointed at my lightness;
      The world had never known what I do find,
      And clouds obscure had shaded still her brightness.
    Then had no censor's eye these lines surveyed,
      Nor graver brows have judged my Muse so vain;
      No sun my blush and error had bewrayed,
      Nor yet the world had heard of such disdain.
    Then had I walked with bold erected face;
      No downcast look had signified my miss;
      But my degraded hopes with such disgrace
      Did force me groan out griefs and utter this.
    For being full, should I not then have spoken,
    My sense oppressed had failed and heart had broken.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Thou, poor heart, sacrificed unto the fairest,
      Hast sent the incense of thy sighs to heaven;
      And still against her frowns fresh vows repairest,
      And made thy passions with her beauty even.
    And you, mine eyes, the agents of my heart,
      Told the dumb message of my hidden grief;
      And oft, with careful tunes, with silent art,
      Did treat the cruel Fair to yield relief.
    And you, my verse, the advocates of love,
      Have followed hard the process of my case:
      And urged that title which doth plainly prove
      My faith should win, if justice might have place.
    Yet though I see that nought we do can move,
    'Tis not disdain must make me cease to love.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If this be love, to draw a weary breath,
      To paint on floods till the shore cry to th'air;
      With downward looks still reading on the earth.
      These sad memorials of my love's despair;
    If this be love, to war against my soul,
      Lie down to wail, rise up to sigh and grieve,
      The never-resting stone of care to roll,
      Still to complain my griefs, whilst none relieve;
    If this be love, to clothe me with dark thoughts,
      Haunting untrodden paths to wail apart,
      My pleasures horror, music tragic notes,
      Tears in mine eyes and sorrow at my heart;
    If this be love, to live a living death,
    Then do I love, and draw this weary breath.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Then do I love and draw this weary breath
      For her, the cruel Fair, within whose brow
      I written find the sentence of my death
      In unkind letters wrote she cares not how.
    Thou power that rul'st the confines of the night,
      Laughter-loving goddess, worldly pleasures' queen,
      Intenerate that heart that sets so light
      The truest love that ever yet was seen;
    And cause her leave to triumph in this wise
      Upon the prostrate spoil of that poor heart
      That serves, a trophy to her conquering eyes,
      And must their glory to the world impart;
    Once let her know sh'hath done enough to prove me,
    And let her pity if she cannot love me!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Tears, vows and prayers gain the hardest hearts,
      Tears, vows and prayers have I spent in vain;
      Tears cannot soften flint nor vows convert;
      Prayers prevail not with a quaint disdain.
    I lose my tears where I have lost my love,
      I vow my faith where faith is not regarded,
      I pray in vain a merciless to move;
      So rare a faith ought better be rewarded.
    Yet though I cannot win her will with tears,
      Though my soul's idol scorneth all my vows,
      Though all my prayers be to so deaf ears,
      No favour though the cruel Fair allows,
    Yet will I weep, vow, pray to cruel she;
    Flint, frost, disdain, wears, melts and yields, we see.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    My spotless love hovers with purest wings
      About the temple of the proudest frame,
      Where blaze those lights, fairest of earthly things;
      Which clear our clouded world with brightest flame.
    M'ambitious thoughts, confined in her face,
      Affect no honour but what she can give;
      My hopes do rest in limits of her grace;
      I weigh no comfort unless she relieve.
    For she that can my heart imparadise,
      Holds in her fairest hand what dearest is.
      My fortune's wheel's the circle of her eyes,
      Whose rolling grace deign once a turn of bliss.
    All my life's sweet consists in her alone,
    So much I love the most unloving one.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Behold what hap Pygmalion had to frame
      And carve his proper grief upon a stone!
      My heavy fortune is much like the same;
      I work on flint and that's the cause I moan.
    For hapless lo, even with mine own desires
      I figured on the table of my heart
      The fairest form that the world's eye admires,
      And so did perish by my proper art.
    And still I toil to change the marble breast
      Of her whose sweetest grace I do adore,
      Yet cannot find her breathe unto my rest.
      Hard is her heart, and woe is me therefore.
    O happy he that joyed his stone and art!
    Unhappy I, to love a stony heart!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Those snary locks are those same nets, my dear,
      Wherewith my liberty thou didst surprise
      Love was the flame that fired me so near,
      The dart transpiercing were those crystal eyes.
    Strong is the net, and fervent is the flame;
      Deep is the wound my sighs can well report.
      Yet I do love, adore, and praise the same,
      That holds, that burns, that wounds in this sort;
    And list not seek to break, to quench, to heal,
      The bond, the flame, the wound that festereth so,
      By knife, by liquor, or by salve to deal;
      So much I please to perish in my woe.
    Yet lest long travails be above my strength,
    Good Delia, loose, quench, heal me, now at length!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If that a loyal heart and faith unfeigned,
      If a sweet languish with a chaste desire,
      If hunger-starven thoughts so long retained,
      Fed but with smoke, and cherished but with fire;
    And if a brow with care's characters painted
      Bewray my love with broken words half spoken
      To her which sits in my thoughts' temple sainted,
      And lays to view my vulture-gnawn heart open;
    If I have done due homage to her eyes,
      And had my sighs still tending on her name,
      If on her love my life and honour lies,
      And she, th'unkindest maid, still scorns the same;
    Let this suffice, that all the world may see
    The fault is hers, though mine the hurt must be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Happy in sleep, waking content to languish,
      Embracing clouds by night, in daytime mourn,
      My joys but shadows, touch of truth my anguish,
      Griefs ever springing, comforts never born;
    And still expecting when she will relent,
      Grown hoarse with crying, "mercy, mercy give,"
      So many vows and prayers having spent
      That weary of my life I loathe to live;
    And yet the hydra of my cares renews
      Still new-born sorrows of her fresh disdain;
      And still my hope the summer winds pursues,
      Finding no end nor period of my pain;
    This is my state, my griefs do touch so nearly,
    And thus I live because I love her dearly.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Why should I sing in verse? Why should I frame
      These sad neglected notes for her dear sake?
      Why should I offer up unto her name,
      The sweetest sacrifice my youth can make?
    Why should I strive to make her live for ever,
      That never deigns to give me joy to live?
      Why should m'afflicted Muse so much endeavour
      Such honour unto cruelty to give?
    If her defects have purchased her this fame,
      What should her virtues do, her smiles, her love?
      If this her worst, how should her best inflame?
      What passions would her milder favours move?
    Favours, I think, would sense quite overcome;
    And that makes happy lovers ever dumb.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Since the first look that led me to this error,
      To this thoughts' maze to my confusion tending,
      Still have I lived in grief, in hope, in terror,
      The circle of my sorrows never ending;
    Yet cannot leave her love that holds me hateful;
      Her eyes exact it, though her heart disdains me.
      See what reward he hath that serves th'ungrateful?
      So true and loyal love no favour gains me.
    Still must I whet my young desires abated,
      Upon the flint of such a heart rebelling;
      And all in vain; her pride is so innated,
      She yields no place at all for pity's dwelling.
    Oft have I told her that my soul did love her,
    And that with tears; yet all this will not move her.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Restore thy tresses to the golden ore,
      Yield Cytherea's son those arks of love;
      Bequeath the heavens the stars that I adore,
      And to the orient do thy pearls remove;
    Yield thy hands' pride unto the ivory white;
      T'Arabian odours give thy breathing sweet;
      Restore thy blush unto Aurora bright;
      To Thetis give the honour of thy feet.
    Let Venus have the graces she resigned,
      And thy sweet voice give back unto the spheres;
      But yet restore thy fierce and cruel mind
      To Hyrcan tigers and to ruthless bears;
    Yield to the marble thy hard heart again;
    So shalt thou cease to plague, and I to pain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    What it is to breathe and live without life;
      How to be pale with anguish, red with fear,
      T'have peace abroad, and nought within but strife:
      Wish to be present, and yet shun t'appear;
    How to be bold far off, and bashful near;
      How to think much, and have no words to speak;
      To crave redress, yet hold affliction dear;
      To have affection strong, a body weak,
    Never to find, yet evermore to seek;
      And seek that which I dare not hope to find;
      T'affect this life and yet this life disleek,
      Grateful t'another, to myself unkind:
    This cruel knowledge of these contraries,
    Delia, my heart hath learned out of those eyes.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    If beauty thus be clouded with a frown,
      That pity shines no comfort to my bliss,
      And vapours of disdain so overgrown,
      That my life's light wholly indarkened is,
    Why should I more molest the world with cries,
      The air with sighs, the earth below with tears,
      Since I live hateful to those ruthful eyes,
      Vexing with untuned moan her dainty ears!
    If I have loved her dearer than my breath,
      My breath that calls the heaven to witness it!--
      And still hold her most dear until my death,
      And if that all this cannot move one whit,
    Yet sure she cannot but must think apart
    She doth me wrong to grieve so true a heart.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Come Time, the anchor hold of my desire,
      My last resort whereto my hopes appeal;
      Cause once the date of her disdain t'exspire,
      Make her the sentence of her wrath repeal.
    Rob her fair brow, break in on beauty, steal
      Power from those eyes which pity cannot spare;
      Deal with those dainty cheeks, as she doth deal
      With this poor heart consumed with despair.
    This heart made now the prospective of care
      By loving her, the cruelst fair that lives,
      The cruelst fair that sees I pine for her,
      And never mercy to thy merit gives.
    Let her not still triumph over the prize
    Of mine affections taken by her eyes.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Time, cruel Time, come and subdue that brow
      Which conquers all but thee, and thee too stays,
      As if she were exempt from scythe or bow,
      From love or years unsubject to decays.
    Or art thou grown in league with those fair eyes,
      That they may help thee to consume our days?
      Or dost thou spare her for her cruelties,
      Being merciless like thee that no man weighs?
    And yet thou seest thy power she disobeys,
      Cares not for thee, but lets thee waste in vain,
      And prodigal of hours and years betrays
      Beauty and youth t'opinion and disdain.
    Yet spare her, Time; let her exempted be;
    She may become more kind to thee or me.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    These sorrowing sighs, the smoke of mine annoy,
      These tears, which heat of sacred flame distils,
      Are those due tributes that my faith doth pay
      Unto the tyrant whose unkindness kills.
    I sacrifice my youth and blooming years
      At her proud feet, and she respects not it;
      My flower, untimely's withered with my tears,
      By winter woes for spring of youth unfit.
    She thinks a look may recompense my care,
      And so with looks prolongs my long-looked ease;
      As short that bliss, so is the comfort rare;
      Yet must that bliss my hungry thoughts appease.
    Thus she returns my hopes so fruitless ever;
    Once let her love indeed, or eye me never!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    False hope prolongs my ever certain grief,
      Traitor to me, and faithful to my love.
      A thousand times it promised me relief,
      Yet never any true effect I prove.
    Oft when I find in her no truth at all,
      I banish her, and blame her treachery;
      Yet soon again I must her back recall,
      As one that dies without her company.
    Thus often, as I chase my hope from me,
      Straightway she hastes her unto Delia's eyes;
      Fed with some pleasing look, there shall she be,
      And so sent back. And thus my fortune lies;
    Looks feed my hope, hope fosters me in vain;
    Hopes are unsure when certain is my pain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Look in my griefs, and blame me not to mourn,
      From care to care that leads a life so bad;
      Th'orphan of fortune, born to be her scorn,
      Whose clouded brow doth make my days so sad.
    Long are their nights whose cares do never sleep,
      Loathsome their days who never sun yet joyed;
      The impression of her eyes do pierce so deep,
      That thus I live both day and night annoyed.
    Yet since the sweetest root yields fruit so sour,
      Her praise from my complaint I may not part;
      I love th'effect, the cause being of this power;
      I'll praise her face and blame her flinty heart,
    Whilst we both make the world admire at us,
    Her for disdain, and me for loving thus.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Reignin my thoughts, fair hand, sweet eye, rare voice!
      Possess me whole, my heart's triumvirate!
      Yet heavy heart, to make so hard a choice
      Of such as spoil thy poor afflicted state!
    For whilst they strive which shall be lord of all,
      All my poor life by them is trodden down;
      They all erect their trophies on my fall,
      And yield me nought that gives them their renown.
    When back I look, I sigh my freedom past,
      And wail the state wherein I present stand,
      And see my fortune ever like to last,
      Finding me reined with such a heavy hand.
    What can I do but yield? and yield I do;
    And serve all three, and yet they spoil me too!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Whilst by thy eyes pursued, my poor heart flew
      Into the sacred refuge of thy breast;
      Thy rigour in that sanctuary slew
      That which thy succ'ring mercy should have blest.
    No privilege of faith could it protect,
      Faith being with blood and five years witness signed,
      Wherein no show gave cause of least suspect,
      For well thou saw'st my love and how I pined.
    Yet no mild comfort would thy brow reveal,
      No lightning looks which falling hopes erect;
      What boots to laws of succour to appeal?
      Ladies and tyrants never laws respect.
    Then there I die from whence my life should come,
    And by that hand whom such deeds ill become.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Still in the trace of one perplexed thought,
      My ceaseless cares continually run on,
      Seeking in vain what I have ever sought,
      One in my love, and her hard heart still one.
    I who did never joy in other sun,
      And have no stars but those that must fulfil
      The work of rigour, fatally begun
      Upon this heart whom cruelty will kill,
    Injurious Delia!--yet, I love thee still,
      And will whilst I shall draw this breath of mine;
      I'll tell the world that I deserved but ill,
      And blame myself, t'excuse that heart of thine;
    See then who sins the greater of us twain,
    I in my love, or thou in thy disdain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Oft do I marvel whether Delia's eyes
      Are eyes, or else two radiant stars that shine;
      For how could nature ever thus devise
      Of earth, on earth, a substance so divine?
    Stars, sure, they are, whose motions rule desires,
      And calm and tempest follow their aspects;
      Their sweet appearing still such power inspires,
      That makes the world admire so strange effects.
    Yet whether fixed or wandering stars are they,
      Whose influence rules the orb of my poor heart;
      Fixed, sure, they are, but wandering make me stray
      In endless errors whence I cannot part.
    Stars, then, not eyes, move you with milder view
    Your sweet aspect on him that honours you!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    The star of my mishap imposed this pain
      To spend the April of my years in grief;
      Finding my fortune ever in the wane,
      With still fresh cares, supplied with no relief.
    Yet thee I blame not, though for thee 'tis done;
      But these weak wings presuming to aspire,
      Which now are melted by thine eyes' bright sun
      That makes me fall from off my high desire;
    And in my fall I cry for help with speed,
      No pitying eye looks back upon my fears;
      No succour find I now when most I need:
      My heats must drown in th'ocean of my tears,
    Which still must bear the title of my wrong,
    Caused by those cruel beams that were so strong.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    And yet I cannot reprehend the flight,
      Or blame th'attempt, presuming so to soar;
      The mounting venture for a high delight
      Did make the honour of the fall the more.
    For who gets wealth, that puts not from the shore?
      Danger hath honours, great designs their fame,
      Glory doth follow, courage goes before;
      And though th'event oft answers not the same,
    Suffice that high attempts have never shame.
      The mean observer whom base safety keeps,
      Lives without honour, dies without a name,
      And in eternal darkness ever sleeps.
    And therefore, Delia, 'tis to me no blot
    To have attempted though attained thee not.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c c

    Raising my hopes on hills of high desire,
      Thinking to scale the heaven of her heart,
      My slender means presumed too high a part,
    Her thunder of disdain forced me retire,
    And threw me down to pain in all this fire,
      Where lo, I languish in so heavy smart
      Because th'attempt was far above my art;
    Her pride brooked not poor souls should come so nigh her.
    Yet, I protest, my high desiring will
      Was not to dispossess her of her right;
      Her sovereignty should have remained still;
      I only sought the bliss to have her sight.
    Her sight, contented thus to see me spill,
    Framed my desires fit for her eyes to kill.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Why dost thou, Delia, credit so thy glass,
      Gazing thy beauty deigned thee by the skies,
      And dost not rather look on him, alas!
      Whose state best shows the force of murdering eyes?
    The broken tops of lofty trees declare
      The fury of a mercy-wanting storm;
      And of what force thy wounding graces are
      Upon myself, you best may find the form.
    Then leave thy glass, and gaze thyself on me;
      That mirror shows what power is in thy face;
      To view your form too much may danger be,
      Narcissus changed t'a flower in such a case.
    And you are changed, but not t'a hyacinth;
    I fear your eye hath turned your heart to flint.

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d

    I once may see when years shall wreck my wrong,
      And golden hairs shall change to silver wire,
      And those bright rays that kindle all this fire,
    Shall fail in force, their working not so strong,
    Then beauty, now the burden of my song,
      Whose glorious blaze the world doth so admire,
      Must yield up all to tyrant Time's desire;
    Then fade those flowers that decked her pride so long.
    When if she grieve to gaze her in her glass,
      Which then presents her whiter-withered hue,
    Go you, my verse, go tell her what she was,
      For what she was, she best shall find in you.
      Your fiery heat lets not her glory pass,
      But phoenix-like shall make her live anew.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Look, Delia, how w'esteem the half-blown rose,
      The image of thy blush, and summer's honour,
      Whilst yet her tender bud doth undisclose
      That full of beauty time bestows upon her.
    No sooner spreads her glory in the air,
      But straight her wide-blown pomp comes to decline;
      She then is scorned that late adorned the fair;
      So fade the roses of those cheeks of thine.
    No April can revive thy withered flowers,
      Whose springing grace adorns thy glory now;
      Swift speedy time, feathered with flying hours,
      Dissolves the beauty of the fairest brow.
    Then do not thou such treasure waste in vain,
    But love now whilst thou mayst be loved again.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    But love whilst that thou mayst be loved again,
      Now whilst thy May hath filled thy lap with flowers,
      Now whilst thy beauty bears without a stain,
      Now use thy summer smiles, ere winter lowers.
    And whilst thou spread'st unto the rising sun,
      The fairest flower that ever saw the light,
      Now joy thy time before thy sweet be done;
      And, Delia, think thy morning must have night,
    And that thy brightness sets at length to west,
      When thou wilt close up that which now thou showest,
      And think the same becomes thy fading best,
      Which then shall most inveil and shadow most.
    Men do not weigh the stalk for that it was,
    When once they find her flower, her glory pass.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    When men shall find thy flower, thy glory pass,
      And thou with careful brow sitting alone
      Received hast this message from thy glass
      That tells the truth, and says that all is gone;
    Fresh shalt thou see in me the wounds thou mad'st,
      Though spent thy flame, in me the heat remaining.
      I that have loved thee thus before thou fad'st,
      My faith shall wax when thou art in thy waning.
    The world shall find this miracle in me,
      That fire can burn when all the matter's spent;
      Then what my faith hath been thyself shalt see,
      And that thou wast unkind thou mayst repent.
    Thou mayst repent that thou hast scorned my tears,
    When winter snows upon thy sable hairs.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    When winter snows upon thy sable hairs,
      And frost of age hath nipped thy beauties near,
      When dark shall seem thy day that never clears,
      And all lies withered that was held so dear;
    Then take this picture which I here present thee,
      Limned with a pencil not all unworthy;
      Here see the gifts that God and nature lent thee,
      Here read thyself and what I suffered for thee.
    This may remain thy lasting monument,
      Which happily posterity may cherish;
      These colours with thy fading are not spent,
      These may remain when thou and I shall perish.
    If they remain, then thou shalt live thereby;
    They will remain, and so thou canst not die.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Thou canst not die whilst any zeal abound
      In feeling hearts than can conceive these lines;
      Though thou a Laura hast no Petrarch found,
      In base attire yet clearly beauty shines.
    And I though born within a colder clime,
      Do feel mine inward heat as great--I know it;
      He never had more faith, although more rhyme;
      I love as well though he could better show it.
    But I may add one feather to thy fame,
      To help her flight throughout the fairest isle;
      And if my pen could more enlarge thy name,
      Then shouldst thou live in an immortal style.
    For though that Laura better limned be,
    Suffice, thou shalt be loved as well as she!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Be not displeased that these my papers should
      Bewray unto the world how fair thou art;
      Or that my wits have showed the best they could
      The chastest flame that ever warmed heart.
    Think not, sweet Delia, this shall be thy shame,
      My muse should sound thy praise with mournful warble.
      How many live, the glory of whose name
      Shall rest in ice, while thine is graved in marble!
    Thou mayst in after ages live esteemed,
      Unburied in these lines, reserved in pureness;
      These shall entomb those eyes, that have redeemed
      Me from the vulgar, thee from all obscureness.
    Although my careful accents never moved thee,
    Yet count it no disgrace that I loved thee.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Delia, these eyes that so admireth thine,
      Have seen those walls which proud ambition reared
      To check the world, how they entombed have lain
      Within themselves, and on them ploughs have eared;
    Yet never found that barbarous hand attained
      The spoil of fame deserved by virtuous men,
      Whose glorious actions luckily had gained
      Th'eternal annals of a happy pen.
    And therefore grieve not if thy beauties die
      Though time do spoil thee of the fairest veil
      That ever yet covered mortality,
      And must instar the needle and the rail.
    That grace which doth more than inwoman thee,
    Lives in my lines and must eternal be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Most fair and lovely maid, look from the shore,
      See thy Leander striving in these waves,
      Poor soul quite spent, whose force can do no more.
      Now send forth hope, for now calm pity saves,
    And waft him to thee with those lovely eyes,
      A happy convoy to a holy land.
      Now show thy power, and where thy virtue lies;
      To save thine own, stretch out the fairest hand.
    Stretch out the fairest hand, a pledge of peace,
      That hand that darts so right and never misses;
      I shall forget old wrongs, my griefs shall cease;
      And that which gave me wounds, I'll give it kisses.
    Once let the ocean of my care find shore,
    That thou be pleased, and I may sigh no more.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Read in my face a volume of despairs,
      The wailing Iliads of my tragic woe;
      Drawn with my blood, and painted with my cares,
      Wrought by her hand that I have honoured so.
    Who whilst I burn, she sings at my soul's wrack,
      Looking aloft from turret of her pride;
      There my soul's tyrant joys her in the sack
      Of her own seat, whereof I made her guide.
    There do these smokes that from affliction rise,
      Serve as an incense to a cruel dame;
      A sacrifice thrice-grateful to her eyes,
      Because their power serves to exact the same.
    Thus ruins she to satisfy her will,
    The temple where her name was honoured still.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    My Delia hath the waters of mine eyes,
      The ready handmaids on her grace t'attend,
      That never fail to ebb, but ever rise;
      For to their flow she never grants an end.
    The ocean never did attend more duly
      Upon his sovereign's course, the night's pale queen,
      Nor paid the impost of his waves more truly,
      Than mine unto her cruelty hath been.
    Yet nought the rock of that hard heart can move,
      Where beat these tears with zeal, and fury drives;
      And yet, I'd rather languish in her love,
      Than I would joy the fairest she that lives.
    And if I find such pleasure to complain,
    What should I do then if I should obtain?

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    How long shall I in mine affliction mourn,
      A burden to myself, distressed in mind;
      When shall my interdicted hopes return
      From out despair wherein they live confined?
    When shall her troubled brow charged with disdain
      Reveal the treasure which her smiles impart?
      When shall my faith the happiness attain,
      To break the ice that hath congealed her heart?
    Unto herself, herself my love doth summon,
      (If love in her hath any power to move)
      And let her tell me, as she is a woman,
      Whether my faith hath not deserved her love?
    I know her heart cannot but judge with me,
    Although her eyes my adversaries be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Beauty, sweet love, is like the morning dew,
      Whose short refresh upon the tender green
      Cheers for a time but till the sun doth show,
      And straight 'tis gone as it had never been.
    Soon doth it fade that makes the fairest flourish,
      Short is the glory of the blushing rose,
      The hue which thou so carefully dost nourish,
      Yet which at length thou must be forced to lose.
    When thou, surcharged with burden of thy years,
      Shalt bend thy wrinkles homeward to the earth,
      And that in beauty's lease expired appears
      The date of age, the kalends of our death,--
    But ah! no more, this must not be foretold,
    For women grieve to think they must be old.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    I must not grieve my love, whose eyes would read
      Lines of delight, whereon her youth might smile;
      Flowers have a time before they come to seed,
      And she is young, and now must sport the while.
    Ah sport, sweet maid, in season of these years,
      And learn to gather flowers before they wither.
      And where the sweetest blossoms first appears,
      Let love and youth conduct thy pleasures thither.
    Lighten forth smiles to clear the clouded air,
      And calm the tempest which my sighs do raise;
      Pity and smiles do best become the fair,
      Pity and smiles shall yield thee lasting praise.
    Make me to say, when all my griefs are gone,
    Happy the heart that sighed for such a one!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Ah whither, poor forsaken, wilt thou go,
      To go from sorrow and thine own distress,
      When every place presents like face of woe,
      And no remove can make thy sorrows less!
    Yet go, forsaken! Leave these woods, these plains,
      Leave her and all, and all for her that leaves
      Thee and thy love forlorn, and both disdains,
      And of both wrongful deems and ill conceives.
    Seek out some place, and see if any place
      Can give the least release unto thy grief;
      Convey thee from the thought of thy disgrace,
      Steal from thyself and be thy cares' own thief.
    But yet what comforts shall I hereby gain?
    Bearing the wound, I needs must feel the pain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Drawn with th'attractive virtue of her eyes,
      My touched heart turns it to that happy coast,
      My joyful north, where all my fortune lies,
      The level of my hopes desired most;
    There where my Delia, fairer than the sun,
      Decked with her youth whereon the world doth smile,
      Joys in that honour which her eyes have won,
      Th'eternal wonder of our happy isle.
    Flourish, fair Albion, glory of the north!
      Neptune's best darling, held between his arms;
      Divided from the world as better worth,
      Kept for himself, defended from all harms!
    Still let disarmed peace deck her and thee;
    And Muse-foe Mars abroad far fostered be!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Care-charmer sleep, son of the sable night,
      Brother to death, in silent darkness born,
      Relieve my languish, and restore the light;
      With dark forgetting of my care return,
    And let the day be time enough to mourn
      The shipwreck of my ill-adventured youth;
      Let waking eyes suffice to wail their scorn,
      Without the torment of the night's untruth.
    Cease, dreams, the images of day-desires,
      To model forth the passions of the morrow;
      Never let rising sun approve you liars,
      To add more grief to aggravate my sorrow;
    Still let me sleep, embracing clouds in vain,
    And never wake to feel the day's disdain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Let others sing of knights and paladins,
      In aged accents and untimely words,
      Paint shadows in imaginary lines
      Which well the reach of their high wits records;
    But I must sing of thee and those fair eyes
      Authentic shall my verse in time to come,
      When yet th'unborn shall say, Lo, where she lies,
      Whose beauty made him speak that else was dumb!
    These are the arks, the trophies I erect,
      That fortify thy name against old age;
      And these thy sacred virtues must protect
      Against the dark and time's consuming rage.
    Though th'error of my youth in them appear,
    Suffice, they show I lived and loved thee, dear.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    As to the Roman that would free his land,
      His error was his honour and renown;
      And more the fame of his mistaking hand
      Than if he had the tyrant overthrown.
    So Delia, hath mine error made me known,
      And my deceived attempt deserved more fame,
      Than if had the victory mine own,
      And thy hard heart had yielded up the same.
    And so likewise renowned is thy blame;
      Thy cruelty, thy glory; O strange case,
      That errors should be graced that merit shame,
      And sin of frowns bring honour to the face.
    Yet happy Delia that thou wast unkind,
    Though happier far, if thou would'st change thy mind.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Like as the lute delights or else dislikes
      As is his art that plays upon the same,
      So sounds my Muse according as she strikes
      On my heart-strings high tuned unto her fame.
    Her touch doth cause the warble of the sound,
      Which here I yield in lamentable wise,
      A wailing descant on the sweetest ground,
      Whose due reports give honour to her eyes;
    Else harsh my style, untunable my Muse;
      Hoarse sounds the voice that praiseth not her name;
      If any pleasing relish here I use,
      Then judge the world her beauty gives the same.
    For no ground else could make the music such,
    Nor other hand could give so sweet a touch.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    None other fame mine unambitious Muse
      Affected ever but t'eternise thee;
      All other honours do my hopes refuse,
      Which meaner prized and momentary be.
    For God forbid I should my papers blot
      With mercenary lines with servile pen,
      Praising virtues in them that have them not,
      Basely attending on the hopes of men.
    No, no, my verse respects not Thames, nor theatres;
      Nor seeks it to be known unto the great;
      But Avon, poor in fame, and poor in waters,
      Shall have my song, where Delia hath her seat.
    Avon shall be my Thames, and she my song;
    No other prouder brooks shall hear my wrong.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Unhappy pen, and ill-accepted lines
      That intimate in vain my chaste desire,
      My chaste desire, which from dark sorrow shines,
      Enkindled by her eyes' celestial fire;
    Celestial fire, and unrespecting powers
      Which pity not the wounds made by their might,
      Showed in these lines, the work of careful hours,
      The sacrifice here offered to her sight.
    But since she weighs them not, this rests for me:
      I'll moan myself, and hide the wrong I have,
      And so content me that her frowns should be
      To m'infant style the cradle and the grave.
    What though my Muse no honour get thereby;
    Each bird sings to herself, and so will I.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g

    Lo here the impost of a faith entire,
      That love doth pay, and her disdain extorts;
      Behold the message of a chaste desire
      That tells the world how much my grief imports.
    These tributary passions, beauty's due,
      I send those eyes, the cabinets of love;
      That cruelty herself might grieve to view
      Th'affliction her unkind disdain doth move.
    And how I live, cast down from off all mirth,
      Pensive, alone, only but with despair;
      My joys abortive perish in their birth,
      My griefs long-lived and care succeeding care.
    This is my state, and Delia's heart is such;
    I say no more, I fear I said too much.


RHYME a a b c d b c d

The price of your efteeme t'a. lower rate,
Then doth befit the pitch of your eftate.
Nor may you build on your fufficiencie, 70
For in our ftrongeft parts we are but weake;
Nor yet may ouermuch di(truft the fame :
Left that you come to checke it fo thereby,
As filence may become worfe then to fpeake;
Though filence women neuer ill became.

RHYME a a b c d b c d

And none we fee were euer ouerthrowne
By others flattery more then by their owne.
For though we Hue amongft the tongues of praife,
And troopes of fmoothing people that collaud
All that we doe, yet 'tis within our harts 80
Th'ambufhment lies, that euermore betraies
Our iudgements, when our felues be come t'applaud
Our owne abilitie and our owne parts.

RHYME a b c a b c d d 

Such are your holy bounds, who muft conuay 90
(If God fo pleafe) the honourable bloud
Of Clifford, and of Ruffcll, led aright
To many worthy ftems ; whofe ofspring may
Looke backe with comfort, to haue had that good
To fpring from fuch a branch that grew f vpright;
Since nothing cheeres the heart of greatnelfe more
Then th'Anceftors faire glory gone before. 97

RHYME a b a b a b

Gath'ring, incroching, wrefting, ioyning to,
Deftroying, building, decking, furnifhing,
Repayring, altring, and fo much adoe,
To his foules toyle, and bodies trauelling :
And all this doth he, little knowing who
Fortune ordaines to haue th'inheriting. 

RHYME a b a b a b

And his faire houfe raif'd hie in Enuies eie ;
Whofe Pillars rear'd (perhaps) on bloud and wrong,
The fpoyles and pillage of Iniquitie:
Who can affure it to continue long ? 120
If Rage fpar'd not the walles of Pietie,
Shall the prophaneft pyles of finne keepe ftrong ? 

RHYME a b a b a b

How many proud afpiring Pallaces
Haue we knowne, made the prey of wrath and pride;
Leuell'd with th'earth, left to forgetfulneffe ;
Whilft titlers their pretended rights decide,
Or ciuill tumults, or an orderleffe
Order, pretending change of fome ftrong fide ? 

RHYME a b a b a b

Then where is that proud Title of thy name,
Written in yce of melting vanitie ? 130
Where is thine heire left to poffeffe the fame ?
Perhaps, not fo well as in beggarie.
Something may rife to be beyond the fhame
Of vile and vnregarded Pouertie. 

RHYME a b a b a b

Which I confeffe, although I often ftriue
To clothe in the beft habit of my fkill,
In all the faireft colours I can giue :
Yet for all that, me thinkes fhe lookes but ill.
I cannot brooke that face, which dead-aliue
Shewes a quicke body, but a buried will. 140

RHYME a b a b a b

Yet oft we fee the barres of this reftraint
Holdes goodneffe in, which loofe wealth would let die;
And fruitleffe riches barriner then want,
Brings forth fmall worth from idle Libertie:
Which when Diforders fhall againe make scant.
It muft refetch her ftate from Pouertie.

RHYME a b a b a b

But yet in all this interchange of all,
Vertue we fee, with her faire grace, ftands faft 
: For what high races hath there come to fall, 
\ With low difgrace, quite vanifhed and paft
Since Chaucer liu'd ; who yet liues, and yet fhall,
Though (which I grieue to fay) but in his laft.

RHYME a b a b a b

Yet what a time hath he wrefted from Time,
And wonne vpon the mighty wafte of dayes,
Vnto th'immortall honour of our clime !
That by his meanes came firft adorn'd with Bayes ;
Vnto the facred Relickes of whofe rime.
We yet are bound in zeale to offer praife ?

RHYME a b a b a b

And, could our lines, begotten in this age,
Obtaine but fuch a bleffed hand of yeares, 160
And fcape the fury of that threatning rage,
Which in confufed cloudes gaftly appeares ;
Who would not ftraine his trauels to ingage,
When fuch true glory fhould fucceede his cares ?

RHYME a b a b a b

But whereas he came planted in the Spring,
And had the Sunne, before him, of Refpeft:
We, fet in th'Autumne, in the withering
And fullen feafon of a cold defect,
Muft tafte thofe fowre diftafts the times do bring
Vpon the fulneffe of a cloy'd Neglect; 170

RHYME a b a b

Although the ftronger conftitutions fhall
Weare out th'infection of diftempred dayes,
And come with glory to out-liue this fall :
Recou'ring of another fpringing of Praife,

RHYME a b a b a b

And therefore doe make not your owne fides bleed
To pricke at others : you that would amend 750
By pulling downe, and thinke you can proceed,
By going backe vnto the farther end,
Let ftand that little Couert left behinde,
Whereon your fuccours and refpects depend.

RHYME a b a b a b

And bring not downe the prizes of the minde,
With vnder-rating of your felues fo bafe :
You that the mighties doores doe crooching find,
To fell your felues to buy a little grace,
Or waite whole months to out-bid Symonie,
For that, which being got, is not your place : 760

RHYME a b a b a b

For if it were, what needed you to buy
What was your due; your thirfting fhewes your fhift.
And little worth that feekes iniurioufly
A worthier from his lawfull roome to lift ?
We cannot fay, that you were then prefer'd,
But that your money was, or fome worfe gift.

RHYME a b a b c b

O fcattring gath'rers, that without regard
Of times to come, will to be made, vndo
As if you were the laft of men, prepar'd
To bury in your graues all other to. 770
Dare you prophane that holy portion
Which neuer facrilegious hand durft do ?

RHYME a b a b c b

Did forme-eftablifhing Deuotion,
To maintaine a refpeftiue reuerence
Extend her bountifull prouifion,
With fuch a charitable prouidence,
For your deforming hands to diffipate,
And make Gods due, your impious expence ?

RHYME a b a b c b

No maruell then, though th'ouerpeftred State
Want roome for goodnefle, if our little hold 780
Be lefned vnto fuch a narrow rate,
That Reuerence cannot fit, fit as it mould :
And yet what neede we thus for roomes complaine,
That mail not want voyde roomes if this courfe hold?

RHYME a b a b c b c d c d e d e

And more then will be fill'd ; for who will ftraine
To get an empty title, to betray
His hopes, and trauell for an honour vaine,
And gaine a Port, without fupport or ftay ?
What neede hath Enuy to maligne their ftate,
That will themfelues, fo kind, giue it away ? 790
This makes indeede our number pafle the rate
Of our prouifions : which, if dealt aright,
Would yeeld fufficient roome t'accommodate,
More then we haue in places requifite.
The ill difpofing onely doth vs fet
In difaray, and out of order quite.
Whiles other guifts then of the minde fhall get

RHYME a b a c a c d c d e d e

Vnder our colours, that which is our dues,
And to our trauels, neither benefit,
Nor grace, nor honour, nor refpect accrewes : 800
The fickneffe of the States foule, Learning, then
The bodies great diftemprature infues.
For if that Learnings roomes to learned men
Were as their heretage diftributed,
All this difordred thruft would ceafe : for when
The fit were call'd, th'vnworthy fruftrated,
Thefe would b'afham'd to feeke, thofe to b'vnfought,
And ftay'ng their turne, were fure they fhould be fped.
Then would our drooping Academies, brought

RHYME a b b c b d d e f e g g

Th'Elixer that our leaden Parts conuart
Into the golden Metall of the Minde.
Who thus obferues in fuch materiall kinde
The certaine Motions of hie Practifes, IO
Knowes on what Center th'A&ions of Mankinde
Turne in their courfe, and fees their fatalnes. __
And hee that can make thefe obferuances,
Muft be aboue his Booke, more then his Pen.
For, wee may be aflur'd, hee men can ghefle,
That thus doth Cesar knowe ; the Man of men.
Whofe Work, improu'd here to our greater gaine,
Makes C/esar more then C/esar to containe. 

RHYME a a a
 
Beyond the path of the outmost sun through utter darkness hurled --
Further than ever comet flared or vagrant star-dust swirled --
Live such as fought and sailed and ruled and loved and made our world.
 
RHYME a a a
 
They are purged of pride because they died, they know the worth of their bays,
They sit at wine with the Maidens Nine and the Gods of the Elder Days,
It is their will to serve or be still as fitteth our Father's praise.
 
RHYME a a a
 
'Tis theirs to sweep through the ringing deep where Azrael's outposts are,
Or buffet a path through the Pit's red wrath when God goes out to war,
Or hang with the reckless Seraphim on the rein of a red-maned star.
 
RHYME a a a
 
          they dare not grieve for her pain --
They know of toil and the end of toil, they know God's law is plain,
So they whistle the Devil to make them sport who know that Sin is vain.
 
RHYME a a a
 
And ofttimes cometh our wise Lord God, master of every trade,
And tells them tales of His daily toil, of Edens newly made;
And they rise to their feet as He passes by, gentlemen unafraid.
 
RHYME a a a
 
To these who are cleansed of base Desire, Sorrow and Lust and Shame --
Gods for they knew the hearts of men, men for they stooped to Fame,
Borne on the breath that men call Death, my brother's spirit came.
 
RHYME a a a
 
He scarce had need to doff his pride or slough the dross of Earth --
E'en as he trod that day to God so walked he from his birth,
In simpleness and gentleness and honour and clean mirth.
 
RHYME a a a
 
So cup to lip in fellowship they gave him welcome high
And made him place at the banquet board -- the Strong Men ranged thereby,
Who had done his work and held his peace and had no fear to die.
 
RHYME a a a
 
Beyond the loom of the last lone star, through open darkness hurled,
Further than rebel comet dared or hiving star-swarm swirled,
Sits he with those that praise our God for that they served His world.
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a a b c c b 
 
          I have made for you a song,
         And it may be right or wrong,
     But only you can tell me if it's true;
         I have tried for to explain
         Both your pleasure and your pain,
     And, Thomas, here's my best respects to you!
 
RHYME a a b c c b 
 
         O there'll surely come a day
         When they'll give you all your pay,
     And treat you as a Christian ought to do;
         So, until that day comes round,
         Heaven keep you safe and sound,
     And, Thomas, here's my best respects to you!
             
TITLE
 
RHYME a a a a b b b c 
 
"What are the bugles blowin' for?" said Files-on-Parade.
"To turn you out, to turn you out", the Colour-Sergeant said.
"What makes you look so white, so white?" said Files-on-Parade.
"I'm dreadin' what I've got to watch", the Colour-Sergeant said.
    For they're hangin' Danny Deever, you can hear the Dead March play,
    The regiment's in hollow square -- they're hangin' him to-day;
    They've taken of his buttons off an' cut his stripes away,
    An' they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.
 
RHYME a a a a b b b c 
 
"What makes the rear-rank breathe so hard?" said Files-on-Parade.
"It's bitter cold, it's bitter cold", the Colour-Sergeant said.
"What makes that front-rank man fall down?" said Files-on-Parade.
"A touch o' sun, a touch o' sun", the Colour-Sergeant said.
    They are hangin' Danny Deever, they are marchin' of him round,
    They have halted Danny Deever by his coffin on the ground;
    An' he'll swing in harf a minute for a sneakin' shootin' hound --
    O they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'!
 
RHYME a a a a b b b c 
 
"HIs cot was right-hand cot to mine", said Files-on-Parade.
"HE's sleepin' out an' far to-night", the Colour-Sergeant said.
"I've drunk his beer a score o' times", said Files-on-Parade.
"HE's drinkin' bitter beer alone", the Colour-Sergeant said.
    They are hangin' Danny Deever, you must mark him to his place,
    For he shot a comrade sleepin' -- you must look him in the face;
    Nine hundred of his county an' the regiment's disgrace,
    While they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.
 
RHYME a a a a b b b c 
 
"What's that so black agin' the sun?" said Files-on-Parade.
"It's Danny fightin' hard for life", the Colour-Sergeant said.
"What's that that whimpers overhead?" said Files-on-Parade.
"It's Danny's soul that's passin' now", the Colour-Sergeant said.
    For they're done with Danny Deever, you can hear the quickstep play,
    The regiment's in column, an' they're marchin' us away;
    Ho! the young recruits are shakin', an' they'll want their beer to-day,
    After hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a b b c c c c  
 
I went into a public-house to get a pint o' beer,
The publican he up an' sez, "We serve no red-coats here."
The girls behind the bar they laughed an' giggled fit to die,
I outs into the street again an' to myself sez I:
    O it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, go away";
    But it's "Thank you, Mister Atkins", when the band begins to play,
    The band begins to play, my boys, the band begins to play,
    O it's "Thank you, Mister Atkins", when the band begins to play.
 
RHYME a a b b c c c c  
 
I went into a theatre as sober as could be,
They gave a drunk civilian room, but hadn't none for me;
They sent me to the gallery or round the music-halls,
But when it comes to fightin', Lord! they'll shove me in the stalls!
    For it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, wait outside";
    But it's "Special train for Atkins" when the trooper's on the tide,
    The troopship's on the tide, my boys, the troopship's on the tide,
    O it's "Special train for Atkins" when the trooper's on the tide.
 
RHYME a a b b c c c c  
 
Yes, makin' mock o' uniforms that guard you while you sleep
Is cheaper than them uniforms, an' they're starvation cheap;
An' hustlin' drunken soldiers when they're goin' large a bit
Is five times better business than paradin' in full kit.
    Then it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, how's yer soul?"
    But it's "Thin red line of heroes" when the drums begin to roll,
    The drums begin to roll, my boys, the drums begin to roll,
    O it's "Thin red line of heroes" when the drums begin to roll.
 
RHYME a a b b c c c c  
 
We aren't no thin red heroes, nor we aren't no blackguards too,
But single men in barricks, most remarkable like you;
An' if sometimes our conduck isn't all your fancy paints,
Why, single men in barricks don't grow into plaster saints;
    While it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, fall behind",
    But it's "Please to walk in front, sir", when there's trouble in the wind,
    There's trouble in the wind, my boys, there's trouble in the wind,
    O it's "Please to walk in front, sir", when there's trouble in the wind.
 
RHYME a a b b c c d d 

You talk o' better food for us, an' schools, an' fires, an' all:
We'll wait for extry rations if you treat us rational.
Don't mess about the cook-room slops, but prove it to our face
The Widow's Uniform is not the soldier-man's disgrace.
    For it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Chuck him out, the brute!"
    But it's "Saviour of his country" when the guns begin to shoot;
    An' it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' anything you please;
    An' Tommy ain't a bloomin' fool -- you bet that Tommy sees!
 
TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d c d e e f f  
 
We've fought with many men acrost the seas,
  An' some of hem was brave an' some was not:
The Paythan an' the Zulu an' Burmese;
  But the Fuzzy was the finest o' the lot.
We never got a ha'porth's change of him:
  HE squatted in the scrub an' hocked our horses,
HE cut our sentries up at Sua~kim~,
  An' he played the cat an' banjo with our forces.
    So here's ~to~ you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, at your home in the Soudan;
    You're a pore benighted heathen but a first-class fightin' man;
    We gives you your certificate, an' if you want it signed
    We'll come an' have a romp with you whenever you're inclined.
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d e e f f  
 
We took our chanst among the Khyber hills,
  The Boers knocked us silly at a mile,
The Burman give us Irriwaddy chills,
  An' a Zulu ~impi~ dished us up in style:
But all we ever got from such as they
  Was pop to what the Fuzzy made us swaller;
We held our bloomin' own, the papers say,
  But man for man the Fuzzy knocked us holler.
    Then here's ~to~ you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, an' the missis and the kid;
    Our orders was to break you, an' of course we went an' did.
    We sloshed you with Martinis, an' it wasn't hardly fair;
    But for all the odds agin' you, Fuzzy-Wuz, you broke the square.
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d e e f f  
 
HE hasn't got no papers of his own,
  HE hasn't got no medals nor rewards,
So we must certify the skill he's shown
  In usin' of his long two-handed swords:
When he's hoppin' in an' out among the bush
  With his coffin-headed shield an' shovel-spear,
An happy day with Fuzzy on the rush
  Will last an healthy Tommy for a year.
    So here's ~to~ you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, an' your friends which are no more,
    If we hadn't lost some messmates we would help you to deplore;
    But give an' take's the gospel, an' we'll call the bargain fair,
    For if you have lost more than us, you crumpled up the square!
 
RHYME a b a b c d c d e e f f  
 
HE rushes at the smoke when we let drive,
  An', before we know, he's hackin' at our head;
HE's all hot sand an' ginger when alive,
  An' he's generally shammin' when he's dead.
HE's a daisy, he's a ducky, he's a lamb!
  HE's a injia-rubber idiot on the spree,
HE's the on'y thing that doesn't give a damn
  For a Regiment o' British Infantree!
    So here's ~to~ you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, at your home in the Soudan;
    You're a pore benighted heathen but a first-class fightin' man;
    An' here's ~to~ you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, with your hayrick head of hair --
    You big black boundin' beggar -- for you broke a British square!
 
TITLE

RHYME a a b c c b d d e f f e 
 
You may talk o' gin and beer
When you're quartered safe out here,
An' you're sent to penny-fights an' Aldershot it;
But when it comes to slaughter
You will do your work on water,
An' you'll lick the bloomin' boots of him that's got it.
Now in Injia's sunny clime,
Where I used to spend my time
A-servin' of HEr Majesty the Queen,
Of all them blackfaced crew
The finest man I knew
Was our regimental bhisti, Gunga Din.
   
TITLE

RHYME a a b b c d c d  
 
Wot makes the soldier's heart to penk, wot makes him to perspire?
It isn't standin' up to charge nor lyin' down to fire;
But it's everlastin' waitin' on a everlastin' road
For the commissariat camel an' his commissariat load.
    O the oont*, O the oont, O the commissariat oont!
     With his silly neck a-bobbin' like a basket full o' snakes;
    We packs him like an idol, an' you ought to hear him grunt,
     An' when we gets him loaded up his blessed girth-rope breaks.
 
RHYME a a b b c d c d  
 
Wot makes the rear-guard swear so hard when night is drorin' in,
An' every native follower is shiverin' for his skin?
It ain't the chanst o' being rushed by Paythans from the hills,
It's the commissariat camel puttin' on his bloomin' frills!
    O the oont, O the oont, O the hairy scary oont!
     A-trippin' over tent-ropes when we've got the night alarm!
    We socks him with a stretcher-pole an' heads him off in front,
     An' when we've saved his bloomin' life he chaws our bloomin' arm.
 
RHYME a a b b c d c d  
 
The horse he knows above a bit, the bullock's but a fool,
The elephant's a gentleman, the battery-mule's a mule;
But the commissariat cam-u-el, when all is said an' done,
HE's a devil an' a ostrich an' a orphan-child in one.
    O the oont, O the oont, O the Gawd-forsaken oont!
     The lumpy-humpy hummin'-bird a-singin' where he lies,
    HE's blocked the whole division from the rear-guard to the front,
     An' when we get him up again -- the beggar goes an' dies!
 
RHYME a a b b c d c d  
 
HE'll gall an' chafe an' lame an' fight -- he smells most awful vile;
HE'll lose hisself for ever if you let him stray a mile;
HE's game to graze the hole day long an' howl the hole night through,
An' when he comes to greasy ground he splits hisself in two.
    O the oont, O the oont, O the floppin', droppin' oont!
     When his long legs give from under an' his meltin' eye is dim,
    The tribes is up behind us, and the tribes is out in front --
     It ain't no jam for Tommy, but it's kites an' crows for him.
 
RHYME a a b b c d c d  
 
So when the cruel march is done, an' when the roads is blind,
An' when we sees the camp in front an' hears the shots behind,
Ho! then we strips his saddle off, and all his woes is past:
HE thinks on us that used him so, and gets revenge at last.
    O the oont, O the oont, O the floatin', bloatin' oont!
     The late lamented camel in the water-cut he lies;
    We keeps a mile behind him an' we keeps a mile in front,
     But he gets into the drinkin'-casks, and then o' course we dies.
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a b b c c d d  
 
This happened in a battle to a batt'ry of the corps
Which is first among the women an' amazin' first in war;
An' what the bloomin' battle was I don't remember now,
But Two's off-lead he answered to the name o' ~Snarleyow~.
    Down in the Infantry, nobody cares;
    Down in the Cavalry, Colonel he swears;
    But down in the lead with the wheel at the flog
    Turns the bold Bombardier to a little whipped dog!

TITLE
 
RHYME a a *

They was movin' into action, they was needed very sore,
To learn a little schoolin' to a native army corps,
They had nipped against an uphill, they was tuckin' down the brow,
When a tricky, trundlin' roundshot give the knock to ~Snarleyow~.
 
RHYME a a *

They cut him loose an' left him -- he was almost tore in two --
But he tried to follow after as a well-trained horse should do;
HE went an' fouled the limber, an' the Driver's Brother squeals:
"Pull up, pull up for ~Snarleyow~ -- his head's between his heels!"
 
RHYME a a *

The Driver humped his shoulder, for the wheels was goin' round,
An' there ain't no "Stop, conductor!" when a batt'ry's changin' ground;
Sez he:  "I broke the beggar in, an' very sad I feels,
But I couldn't pull up, not for ~you~ -- your head between your heels!"
 
RHYME a a *

HE hadn't hardly spoke the word, before a droppin' shell
A little right the batt'ry an' between the sections fell;
An' when the smoke had cleared away, before the limber wheels,
There lay the Driver's Brother with his head between his heels.
 
RHYME a a *

Then sez the Driver's Brother, an' his words was very plain,
"For Gawd's own sake get over me, an' put me out o' pain."
They saw his wounds was mortial, an' they judged that it was best,
So they took an' drove the limber straight across his back an' chest.
 
RHYME a a *

The Driver he give nothin' 'cept a little coughin' grunt,
But he swung his horses handsome when it came to "Action Front!"
An' if one wheel was juicy, you may lay your Monday head
'Twas juicier for the niggers when the case begun to spread.
 
RHYME a a *

The moril of this story, it is plainly to be seen:
You havn't got no families when servin' of the Queen --
You havn't got no brothers, fathers, sisters, wives, or sons --
If you want to win your battles take an' work your bloomin' guns!
    Down in the Infantry, nobody cares;
    Down in the Cavalry, Colonel he swears;
    But down in the lead with the wheel at the flog
    Turns the bold Bombardier to a little whipped dog!
 
TITLE

RHYME a a *
 
There was a row in Silver Street that's near to Dublin Quay,
Between an Irish regiment an' English cavalree;
It started at Revelly an' it lasted on till dark:
The first man dropped at Harrison's, the last forninst the Park.
   
RHYME a a *
 
There was a row in Silver Street -- the regiments was out,
They called us "Delhi Rebels", an' we answered "Threes about!"
That drew them like a hornet's nest -- we met them good an' large,
The English at the double an' the Irish at the charge.
   
RHYME a a *
 
There was a row in Silver Street -- an' I was in it too;
We passed the time o' day, an' then the belts went whirraru!
I misremember what occurred, but subsequint the storm
A ~Freeman's Journal Supplemint~ was all my uniform.
   
RHYME a a *
 
There was a row in Silver Street -- they sent the Polis there,
The English were too drunk to know, the Irish didn't care;
But when they grew impertinint we simultaneous rose,
Till half o' them was Liffey mud an' half was tatthered clothes
   
RHYME a a *
 
There was a row in Silver Street -- it might ha' raged till now,
But some one drew his side-arm clear, an' nobody knew how;
'Twas Hogan took the point an' dropped; we saw the red blood run:
An' so we all was murderers that started out in fun.
   
RHYME a a *
 
There was a row in Silver Street -- but that put down the shine,
Wid each man whisperin' to his next:  "'Twas never work o' mine!"
We went away like beaten dogs, an' down the street we bore him,
The poor dumb corpse that couldn't tell the bhoys were sorry for him.
   
RHYME a a *
 
There was a row in Silver Street -- it isn't over yet,
For half of us are under guard wid punishments to get;
'Tis all a merricle to me as in the Clink I lie:
There was a row in Silver Street -- begod, I wonder why!
   
TITLE
  
RHYME a a *
 
By the old Moulmein Pagoda, lookin' eastward to the sea,
There's a Burma girl a-settin', and I know she thinks o' me;
For the wind is in the palm-trees, and the temple-bells they say:
"Come you back, you British soldier; come you back to Mandalay!"

RHYME a a *
 
HEr petticoat was yaller an' her little cap was green,
An' her name was Supi-yaw-lat -- jes' the same as Theebaw's Queen,
An' I seed her first a-smokin' of a whackin' white cheroot,
An' a-wastin' Christian kisses on an heathen idol's foot:

RHYME a a *
 
When the mist was on the rice-fields an' the sun was droppin' slow,
She'd git her little banjo an' she'd sing "~Kulla-lo-lo!~"
With her arm upon my shoulder an' her cheek agin' my cheek
We useter watch the steamers an' the ~hathis~ pilin' teak.

RHYME a a *
 
But that's all shove behind me -- long ago an' fur away,
An' there ain't no 'busses runnin' from the Bank to Mandalay;
An' I'm learnin' here in London what the ten-year soldier tells:
"If you've heard the East a-callin', you won't never heed naught else."

RHYME a a *
 
I am sick o' wastin' leather on these gritty pavin'-stones,
An' the blasted Henglish drizzle wakes the fever in my bones;
Tho' I walks with fifty housemaids outer Chelsea to the Strand,
An' they talks a lot o' lovin', but wot do they understand?

RHYME a a *
 
Ship me somewheres east of Suez, where the best is like the worst,
Where there aren't no Ten Commandments an' a man can raise a thirst;
For the temple-bells are callin', an' it's there that I would be --
By the old Moulmein Pagoda, looking lazy at the sea;
  
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b a b c d e d 
 
To the legion of the lost ones, to the cohort of the damned,
 To my brethren in their sorrow overseas,
Sings a gentleman of England cleanly bred, machinely crammed,
 And a trooper of the Empress, if you please.
Yea, a trooper of the forces who has run his own six horses,
 And faith he went the pace and went it blind,
And the world was more than kin while he held the ready tin,
 But to-day the Sergeant's something less than kind.
   
RHYME a b a b c d e d 
 
Oh, it's sweet to sweat through stables, sweet to empty kitchen slops,
 And it's sweet to hear the tales the troopers tell,
To dance with blowzy housemaids at the regimental hops
 And thrash the cad who says you waltz too well.
Yes, it makes you cock-a-hoop to be "Rider" to your troop,
 And branded with a blasted worsted spur,
When you envy, O how keenly, one poor Tommy being cleanly
 Who blacks your boots and sometimes calls you "Sir".
 
RHYME a b a b c d e d 
 
If the home we never write to, and the oaths we never keep,
 And all we know most distant and most dear,
Across the snoring barrack-room return to break our sleep,
 Can you blame us if we soak ourselves in beer?
When the drunken comrade mutters and the great guard-lantern gutters
 And the horror of our fall is written plain,
Every secret, self-revealing on the aching white-washed ceiling,
 Do you wonder that we drug ourselves from pain?
 
RHYME a b a b c d e d 
 
We have done with Hope and Honour, we are lost to Love and Truth,
 We are dropping down the ladder rung by rung,
And the measure of our torment is the measure of our youth.
 God help us, for we knew the worst too young!
Our shame is clean repentance for the crime that brought the sentence,
 Our pride it is to know no spur of pride,
And the Curse of Reuben holds us till an alien turf enfolds us
 And we die, and none can tell Them where we died.
   
TITLE
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
Oh, there's them Injian temples to admire when you see,
There's the peacock round the corner an' the monkey up the tree,
An' there's that rummy silver grass a-wavin' in the wind,
An' the old Grand Trunk a-trailin' like a rifle-sling behind.
   
RHYME a a b b 
 
At half-past five's Revelly, an' our tents they down must come,
Like a lot of button mushrooms when you pick 'em up at home.
But it's over in a minute, an' at six the column starts,
While the women and the kiddies sit an' shiver in the carts.
   
RHYME a a b b 
 
Oh, then it's open order, an' we lights our pipes an' sings,
An' we talks about our rations an' a lot of other things,
An' we thinks o' friends in England, an' we wonders what they're at,
An' how they would admire for to hear us sling the ~bat~.*
   
RHYME a a b b 
 
It's none so bad o' Sunday, when you're lyin' at your ease,
To watch the kites a-wheelin' round them feather-headed trees,
For although there ain't no women, yet there ain't no barrick-yards,
So the orficers goes shootin' an' the men they plays at cards.
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
So hark an' heed, you rookies, which is always grumblin' sore,
There's worser things than marchin' from Umballa to Cawnpore;
An' if your heels are blistered an' they feels to hurt like hell,
You drop some tallow in your socks an' that will make hem well.
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
We're marchin' on relief over Injia's coral strand,
Eight hundred fightin' Englishmen, the Colonel, and the Band;
Ho! get away you bullock-man, you've heard the bugle blowed,
There's a regiment a-comin' down the Grand Trunk Road;
 
TITLE The Ballad of East and West

RHYME a a *
 
OH, East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet,	
Till Earth and Sky stand presently at God�s great Judgment Seat;	
But there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth,	
When two strong men stand face to face, tho� they come from the ends of the earth!	

RHYME a a *
 
Kamal is out with twenty men to raise the Border-side,
And he has lifted the Colonel's mare that is the Colonel's pride:
He has lifted her out of the stable-door between the dawn and the day,
And turned the calkins upon her feet, and ridden her far away.
Then up and spoke the Colonel's son that led a troop of the Guides:
"Is there never a man of all my men can say where Kamal hides?"
Then up and spoke Mahommed Khan, the son of the Ressaldar:
"If ye know the track of the morning-mist, ye know where his pickets are.
At dusk he harries the Abazai -- at dawn he is into Bonair,
But he must go by Fort Bukloh to his own place to fare,
So if ye gallop to Fort Bukloh as fast as a bird can fly,
By the favour of God ye may cut him off ere he win to the Tongue of Jagai.
But if he be past the Tongue of Jagai, right swiftly turn ye then,
For the length and the breadth of that grisly plain is sown with Kamal's men.
There is rock to the left, and rock to the right, and low lean thorn between,
And ye may hear a breech-bolt snick where never a man is seen."
The Colonel's son has taken a horse, and a raw rough dun was he,
With the mouth of a bell and the heart of Hell  and the head of the gallows-tree.

RHYME a a *
 
The Colonel's son to the Fort has won, they bid him stay to eat --
Who rides at the tail of a Border thief, he sits not long at his meat.
He's up and away from Fort Bukloh as fast as he can fly,
Till he was aware of his father's mare in the gut of the Tongue of Jagai,
Till he was aware of his father's mare with Kamal upon her back,
And when he could spy the white of her eye, he made the pistol crack.
He has fired once, he has fired twice, but the whistling ball went wide.
"Ye shoot like a soldier," Kamal said.  "Show now if ye can ride."
It's up and over the Tongue of Jagai, as blown dustdevils go,
The dun he fled like a stag of ten, but the mare like a barren doe.
The dun he leaned against the bit and slugged his head above,
But the red mare played with the snaffle-bars, as a maiden plays with a glove.
There was rock to the left and rock to the right, and low lean thorn between,
And thrice he heard a breech-bolt snick tho' never a man was seen.
They have ridden the low moon out of the sky, their hoofs drum up the dawn,
The dun he went like a wounded bull, but the mare like a new-roused fawn.
The dun he fell at a water-course -- in a woful heap fell he,
And Kamal has turned the red mare back, and pulled the rider free.

RHYME a a *
 
He has knocked the pistol out of his hand -- small room was there to strive,
"'Twas only by favour of mine," quoth he, "ye rode so long alive:
There was not a rock for twenty mile, there was not a clump of tree,
But covered a man of my own men with his rifle cocked on his knee.
If I had raised my bridle-hand, as I have held it low,
The little jackals that flee so fast were feasting all in a row:
If I had bowed my head on my breast, as I have held it high,
The kite that whistles above us now were gorged till she could not fly."
Lightly answered the Colonel's son:  "Do good to bird and beast,
But count who come for the broken meats before thou makest a feast.
If there should follow a thousand swords to carry my bones away,
Belike the price of a jackal's meal were more than a thief could pay.
They will feed their horse on the standing crop,  their men on the garnered grain,
The thatch of the byres will serve their fires when all the cattle are slain.
But if thou thinkest the price be fair, -- thy brethren wait to sup,
The hound is kin to the jackal-spawn, -- howl, dog, and call them up!
And if thou thinkest the price be high, in steer and gear and stack,
Give me my father's mare again, and I'll fight my own way back!"
Kamal has gripped him by the hand and set him upon his feet.
"No talk shall be of dogs," said he, "when wolf and gray wolf meet.
May I eat dirt if thou hast hurt of me in deed or breath;
What dam of lances brought thee forth to jest at the dawn with Death?"
Lightly answered the Colonel's son:  "I hold by the blood of my clan:
Take up the mare for my father's gift -- by God, she has carried a man!"
The red mare ran to the Colonel's son, and nuzzled against his breast;
"We be two strong men," said Kamal then, "but she loveth the younger best.
So she shall go with a lifter's dower, my turquoise-studded rein,
My broidered saddle and saddle-cloth, and silver stirrups twain."

RHYME a a *
 
The Colonel's son a pistol drew and held it muzzle-end,
"Ye have taken the one from a foe," said he;  "will ye take the mate from a friend?"
"A gift for a gift," said Kamal straight; "a limb for the risk of a limb.
Thy father has sent his son to me, I'll send my son to him!"
With that he whistled his only son, that dropped from a mountain-crest --
He trod the ling like a buck in spring, and he looked like a lance in rest.
"Now here is thy master," Kamal said, "who leads a troop of the Guides,
And thou must ride at his left side as shield on shoulder rides.
Till Death or I cut loose the tie, at camp and board and bed,
Thy life is his -- thy fate it is to guard him with thy head.
So, thou must eat the White Queen's meat, and all her foes are thine,
And thou must harry thy father's hold for the peace of the Border-line,
And thou must make a trooper tough and hack thy way to power --
Belike they will raise thee to Ressaldar when I am hanged in Peshawur."
 
RHYME a a *
 
They have looked each other between the eyes, and there they found no fault,
They have taken the Oath of the Brother-in-Blood on leavened bread and salt:
They have taken the Oath of the Brother-in-Blood on fire and fresh-cut sod,
On the hilt and the haft of the Khyber knife, and the Wondrous Names of God.
The Colonel's son he rides the mare and Kamal's boy the dun,
And two have come back to Fort Bukloh where there went forth but one.
And when they drew to the Quarter-Guard, full twenty swords flew clear --
There was not a man but carried his feud with the blood of the mountaineer.
"Ha' done! ha' done!" said the Colonel's son. "Put up the steel at your sides!
Last night ye had struck at a Border thief -- to-night 'tis a man of the Guides!"
 
RHYME a a *

Oh, East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet,
Till Earth and Sky stand presently at God's great Judgment Seat;
But there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth,
When two strong men stand face to face, tho' they come from the ends of the earth!
 
TITLE

RHYME a b c c c b 

Udai Chand lay sick to death
    In his hold by Gungra hill.
All night we heard the death-gongs ring
For the soul of the dying Rajpoot King,
All night beat up from the women's wing
    A cry that we could not still.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

All night the barons came and went,
    The lords of the outer guard:
All night the cressets glimmered pale
On Ulwar sabre and Tonk jezail,
Mewar headstall and Marwar mail,
    That clinked in the palace yard.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

In the Golden room on the palace roof
    All night he fought for air:
And there was sobbing behind the screen,
Rustle and whisper of women unseen,
And the hungry eyes of the Boondi Queen
    On the death she might not share.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

He passed at dawn -- the death-fire leaped
    From ridge to river-head,
From the Malwa plains to the Abu scars:
And wail upon wail went up to the stars
Behind the grim zenana-bars,
    When they knew that the King was dead.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

The dumb priest knelt to tie his mouth
    And robe him for the pyre.
The Boondi Queen beneath us cried:
"See, now, that we die as our mothers died
In the bridal-bed by our master's side!
    Out, women! -- to the fire!"
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

We drove the great gates home apace:
    White hands were on the sill:
But ere the rush of the unseen feet
Had reached the turn to the open street,
The bars shot down, the guard-drum beat --
    We held the dovecot still.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

A face looked down in the gathering day,
    And laughing spoke from the wall:
"Oh]/e, they mourn here:  let me by --
Azizun, the  Lucknow nautch-girl, I!
When the house is rotten, the rats must fly,
    And I seek another thrall.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

"For I ruled the King as ne'er did Queen, --
    To-night the Queens rule me!
Guard them safely, but let me go,
Or ever they pay the debt they owe
In scourge and torture!"  She leaped below,
    And the grim guard watched her flee.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

They knew that the King had spent his soul
    On a North-bred dancing-girl:
That he prayed to a flat-nosed Lucknow god,
And kissed the ground where her feet had trod,
And doomed to death at her drunken nod,
    And swore by her lightest curl.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

We bore the King to his fathers' place,
    Where the tombs of the Sun-born stand:
Where the gray apes swing, and the peacocks preen
On fretted pillar and jewelled screen,
And the wild boar couch in the house of the Queen
    On the drift of the desert sand.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

The herald read his titles forth,
    We set the logs aglow:
"Friend of the English, free from fear,
Baron of Luni to Jeysulmeer,
Lord of the Desert of Bikaneer,
    King of the Jungle, -- go!"
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

All night the red flame stabbed the sky
    With wavering wind-tossed spears:
And out of a shattered temple crept
A woman who veiled her head and wept,
And called on the King -- but the great King slept,
    And turned not for her tears.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

Small thought had he to mark the strife --
    Cold fear with hot desire --
When thrice she leaped from the leaping flame,
And thrice she beat her breast for shame,
And thrice like a wounded dove she came
    And moaned about the fire.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

One watched, a bow-shot from the blaze,
    The silent streets between,
Who had stood by the King in sport and fray,
To blade in ambush or boar at bay,
And he was a baron old and gray,
    And kin to the Boondi Queen.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

He said:  "O shameless, put aside
    The veil upon thy brow!
Who held the King and all his land
To the wanton will of a harlot's hand!
Will the white ash rise from the blistered brand?
    Stoop down, and call him now!"
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

Then she:  "By the faith of my tarnished soul,
    All things I did not well,
I had hoped to clear ere the fire died,
And lay me down by my master's side
To rule in Heaven his only bride,
    While the others howl in Hell.
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

"But I have felt the fire's breath,
    And hard it is to die!
Yet if I may pray a Rajpoot lord
To sully the steel of a Thakur's sword
With base-born blood of a trade abhorred," --
    And the Thakur answered, "Ay."
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

He drew and struck:  the straight blade drank
    The life beneath the breast.
"I had looked for the Queen to face the flame,
But the harlot dies for the Rajpoot dame --
Sister of mine, pass, free from shame,
    Pass with thy King to rest!"
 
RHYME a b c c c b 

The black log crashed above the white:
    The little flames and lean,
Red as slaughter and blue as steel,
That whistled and fluttered from head to heel,
Leaped up anew, for they found their meal
    On the heart of -- the Boondi Queen!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a a *
 
Before the old Peshawur Gate, where Kurd and Kaffir meet,
The Governor of Kabul dealt the Justice of the Street,
And that was strait as running noose and swift as plunging knife,
Tho' he who held the longer purse might hold the longer life.
 
RHYME a a *
 
There was a hound of Hindustan had struck a Euzufzai,
Wherefore they spat upon his face and led him out to die.
It chanced the King went forth that hour when throat was bared to knife;
The Kaffir grovelled under-hoof and clamoured for his life.
 
RHYME a a *
 
Then said the King:  "Have hope, O friend!  Yea, Death disgraced is hard;
Much honour shall be thine"; and called the Captain of the Guard,
Yar Khan, a bastard of the Blood, so city-babble saith,
And he was honoured of the King -- the which is salt to Death;
And he was son of Daoud Shah, the Reiver of the Plains,
And blood of old Durani Lords ran fire in his veins;
And 'twas to tame an Afghan pride nor Hell nor Heaven could bind,
The King would make him butcher to a yelping cur of Hind.
 
RHYME a a *
 
"Strike!" said the King.  "King's blood art thou --  his death shall be his pride!"
Then louder, that the crowd might catch:  "Fear not -- his arms are tied!"
Yar Khan drew clear the Khyber knife, and struck, and sheathed again.
"O man, thy will is done," quoth he; "a King this dog hath slain."
 
RHYME a a *
 
          Abdhur Rahman, the Durani Chief, to the North and the South is sold.
          The North and the South shall open their mouth to a Ghilzai flag unrolled,
          When the big guns speak to the Khyber peak, and his dog-Heratis fly:
          Ye have heard the song -- How long?  How long?   Wolves of the Abazai!
 
RHYME a a *
 
That night before the watch was set, when all the streets were clear,
The Governor of Kabul spoke:  "My King, hast thou no fear?
Thou knowest -- thou hast heard," -- his speech died at his master's face.
And grimly said the Afghan King:  "I rule the Afghan race.
My path is mine -- see thou to thine -- to-night upon thy bed
Think who there be in Kabul now that clamour for thy head."
 
RHYME a a *
 
That night when all the gates were shut to City and to throne,
Within a little garden-house the King lay down alone.
Before the sinking of the moon, which is the Night of Night,
Yar Khan came softly to the King to make his honour white.
The children of the town had mocked beneath his horse's hoofs,
The harlots of the town had hailed him "butcher!" from their roofs.
But as he groped against the wall, two hands upon him fell,
The King behind his shoulder spake:  "Dead man, thou dost not well!
'Tis ill to jest with Kings by day and seek a boon by night;
And that thou bearest in thy hand is all too sharp to write.
But three days hence, if God be good, and if thy strength remain,
Thou shalt demand one boon of me and bless me in thy pain.
For I am merciful to all, and most of all to thee.
My butcher of the shambles, rest -- no knife hast thou for me!"

RHYME a a *
 
Abdhur Rahman, the Durani Chief, holds hard by the South and the North;
But the Ghilzai knows, ere the melting snows, when the swollen banks break forth,
When the red-coats crawl to the sungar wall, and his Usbeg lances fail:
Ye have heard the song -- How long?  How long? Wolves of the Zuka Kheyl!
 
TITLE

RHYME a a 

They stoned him in the rubbish-field when dawn was in the sky,
According to the written word, "See that he do not die."
 
RHYME a a 

They stoned him till the stones were piled above him on the plain,
And those the labouring limbs displaced they tumbled back again.
 
RHYME a a 

One watched beside the dreary mound that veiled the battered thing,
And him the King with laughter called the Herald of the King.
 
RHYME a a 

It was upon the second night, the night of Ramazan,
The watcher leaning earthward heard the message of Yar Khan.

RHYME a a 

From shattered breast through shrivelled lips broke forth the rattling breath,
"Creature of God, deliver me from agony of Death."
 
RHYME a a 

They sought the King among his girls, and risked their lives thereby:
"Protector of the Pitiful, give orders that he die!"
 
RHYME a a 

"Bid him endure until the day," a lagging answer came;
"The night is short, and he can pray and learn to bless my name."
 
RHYME a a 

Before the dawn three times he spoke, and on the day once more:
"Creature of God, deliver me, and bless the King therefor!"
 
RHYME a a 

They shot him at the morning prayer, to ease him of his pain,
And when he heard the matchlocks clink, he blessed the King again.
 
RHYME a a 

Which thing the singers made a song for all the world to sing,
So that the Outer Seas may know the mercy of the King.

TITLE

RHYME a a *
 
When spring-time flushes the desert grass,
Our kafilas wind through the Khyber Pass.
Lean are the camels but fat the frails,
Light are the purses but heavy the bales,
As the snowbound trade of the North comes down
To the market-square of Peshawur town.
 
RHYME a a *
 
In a turquoise twilight, crisp and chill,
A kafila camped at the foot of the hill.
Then blue smoke-haze of the cooking rose,
And tent-peg answered to  hammer-nose;
And the picketed ponies, shag and wild,
Strained at their ropes as the feed was piled;
And the bubbling camels beside the load
Sprawled for a furlong adown the road;
And the Persian pussy-cats, brought for sale,
Spat at the dogs from the camel-bale;
And the tribesmen bellowed to hasten the food;
And the camp-fires twinkled by Fort Jumrood;
And there fled on the wings of the gathering dusk
A savour of camels and carpets and musk,
A murmur of voices, a reek of smoke,
To tell us the trade of the Khyber woke.
 
RHYME a a *
 
The lid of the flesh-pot chattered high,
The knives were whetted and -- then came I

RHYME a a a 

To Mahbub Ali the muleteer,
Patching his bridles and counting his gear,
Crammed with the gossip of half a year.

RHYME a a *

But Mahbub Ali the kindly said,
"Better is speech when the belly is fed."
So we plunged the hand to the mid-wrist deep
In a cinnamon stew of the fat-tailed sheep,
And he who never hath tasted the food,
By Allah! he knoweth not bad from good.
 
RHYME a a *
 
We cleansed our beards of the mutton-grease,
We lay on the mats and were filled with peace,
And the talk slid north, and the talk slid south,
With the sliding puffs from the hookah-mouth.
Four things greater than all things are, --
Women and Horses and Power and War.
We spake of them all, but the last the most,
For I sought a word of a Russian post,
Of a shifty promise, an unsheathed sword
And a gray-coat guard on the Helmund ford.
Then Mahbub Ali lowered his eyes
In the fashion of one who is weaving lies.
Quoth he:  "Of the Russians who can say?
When the night is gathering all is gray.
But we look that the gloom of the night shall die
In the morning flush of a blood-red sky.
Friend of my heart, is it meet or wise
To warn a King of his enemies?
We know what Heaven or Hell may bring,
But no man knoweth the mind of the King.
That unsought counsel is cursed of God
Attesteth the story of Wali Dad.
 
RHYME a a *
 
"His sire was leaky of tongue and pen,
His dam was a clucking Khuttuck hen;
And the colt bred close to the vice of each,
For he carried the curse of an unstanched speech.
Therewith madness -- so that he sought
The favour of kings at the Kabul court;
And travelled, in hope of honour, far
To the line where the gray-coat squadrons are.
There have I journeyed too -- but I
Saw naught, said naught, and -- did not die!
He harked to rumour, and snatched at a breath
Of `this one knoweth' and `that one saith', --
Legends that ran from mouth to mouth
Of a gray-coat coming, and sack of the South.
These have I also heard -- they pass
With each new spring and the winter grass.
 
RHYME a a *
 
"Hot-foot southward, forgotten of God,
Back to the city ran Wali Dad,
Even to Kabul -- in full durbar
The King held talk with his Chief in War.
Into the press of the crowd he broke,
And what he had heard of the coming spoke.
 
RHYME a a *
 
"Then Gholam Hyder, the Red Chief, smiled,
As a mother might on a babbling child;
But those who would laugh restrained their breath,
When the face of the King showed dark as death.
Evil it is in full durbar
To cry to a ruler of gathering war!
Slowly he led to a peach-tree small,
That grew by a cleft of the city wall.
And he said to the boy:  `They shall praise thy zeal
So long as the red spurt follows the steel.
And the Russ is upon us even now?
Great is thy prudence -- await them, thou.
Watch from the tree.  Thou art young and strong,
Surely thy vigil is not for long.
The Russ is upon us, thy clamour ran?
Surely an hour shall bring their van.
Wait and watch.  When the host is near,
Shout aloud that my men may hear.'
 
RHYME a a *
 
"Friend of my heart, is it meet or wise
To warn a King of his enemies?
A guard was set that he might not flee --
A score of bayonets ringed the tree.
The peach-bloom fell in showers of snow,
When he shook at his death as he looked below.
By the power of God, who alone is great,
Till the seventh day he fought with his fate.
Then madness took him, and men declare
He mowed in the branches as ape and bear,
And last as a sloth, ere his body failed,
And he hung as a bat in the forks, and wailed,
And sleep the cord of his hands untied,
And he fell, and was caught on the points and died.
 
RHYME a a *
 
"Heart of my heart, is it meet or wise
To warn a King of his enemies?
We know what Heaven or Hell may bring,
But no man knoweth the mind of the King.
Of the gray-coat coming who can say?
When the night is gathering all is gray.
Two things greater than all things are,
The first is Love, and the second War.
And since we know not how War may prove,
Heart of my heart, let us talk of Love!"
 
TITLE

RHYME a b a b 
 
The wreath of banquet overnight lay withered on the neck,
 Our hands and scarfs were saffron-dyed for signal of despair,
When we went forth to Paniput to battle with the ~Mlech~, --
 Ere we came back from Paniput and left a kingdom there.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Thrice thirty thousand men were we to force the Jumna fords --
 The hawk-winged horse of Damajee, mailed squadrons of the Bhao,
Stark levies of the southern hills, the Deccan's sharpest swords,
 And he the harlot's traitor son the goatherd Mulhar Rao!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Thrice thirty thousand men were we before the mists had cleared,
 The low white mists of morning heard the war-conch scream and bray;
We called upon Bhowani and we gripped them by the beard,
 We rolled upon them like a flood and washed their ranks away.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
The children of the hills of Khost before our lances ran,
 We drove the black Rohillas back as cattle to the pen;
'Twas then we needed Mulhar Rao to end what we began,
 A thousand men had saved the charge; he fled the field with ten!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
There was no room to clear a sword -- no power to strike a blow,
 For foot to foot, ay, breast to breast, the battle held us fast --
Save where the naked hill-men ran, and stabbing from below
 Brought down the horse and rider and we trampled them and passed.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
To left the roar of musketry rang like a falling flood --
 To right the sunshine rippled red from redder lance and blade --
Above the dark ~Upsaras~* flew, beneath us plashed the blood,
 And, bellying black against the dust, the Bhagwa Jhanda swayed.
  
RHYME a b a b 
 
I saw it fall in smoke and fire, the banner of the Bhao;
 I heard a voice across the press of one who called in vain: --
"Ho! Anand Rao Nimbalkhur, ride!  Get aid of Mulhar Rao!
 Go shame his squadrons into fight -- the Bhao -- the Bhao is slain!"
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Thereat, as when a sand-bar breaks in clotted spume and spray --
 When rain of later autumn sweeps the Jumna water-head,
Before their charge from flank to flank our riven ranks gave way;
 But of the waters of that flood the Jumna fords ran red.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
I held by Scindia, my lord, as close as man might hold;
 A Soobah of the Deccan asks no aid to guard his life;
But Holkar's Horse were flying, and our chiefest chiefs were cold,
 And like a flame among us leapt the long lean Northern knife.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
I held by Scindia -- my lance from butt to tuft was dyed,
 The froth of battle bossed the shield and roped the bridle-chain --
What time beneath our horses' feet a maiden rose and cried,
 And clung to Scindia, and I turned a sword-cut from the twain.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
(He set a spell upon the maid in woodlands long ago,
 A hunter by the Tapti banks she gave him water there:
He turned her heart to water, and she followed to her woe.
 What need had he of Lalun who had twenty maids as fair?)
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Now in that hour strength left my lord; he wrenched his mare aside;
 He bound the girl behind him and we slashed and struggled free.
Across the reeling wreck of strife we rode as shadows ride
 From Paniput to Delhi town, but not alone were we.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
'Twas Lutuf-Ullah Populzai laid horse upon our track,
 A swine-fed reiver of the North that lusted for the maid;
I might have barred his path awhile, but Scindia called me back,
 And  I -- O woe for Scindia! -- I listened and obeyed.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
League after league the formless scrub took shape and glided by --
 League after league the white road swirled behind the white mare's feet --
League after league, when leagues were done, we heard the Populzai,
 Where sure as Time and swift as Death the tireless footfall beat.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Noon's eye beheld that shame of flight, the shadows fell, we fled
 Where steadfast as the wheeling kite he followed in our train;
The black wolf warred where we had warred, the jackal mocked our dead,
 And terror born of twilight-tide made mad the labouring brain.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
I gasped: -- "A kingdom waits my lord; her love is but her own.
 A day shall mar, a day shall cure for her, but what for thee?
Cut loose the girl:  he follows fast.  Cut loose and ride alone!"
 Then Scindia 'twixt his blistered lips: -- "My Queens' Queen shall she be!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
"Of all who ate my bread last night 'twas she alone that came
 To seek her love between the spears and find her crown therein!
One shame is mine to-day, what need the weight of double shame?
 If once we reach the Delhi gate, though all be lost, I win!"
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
We rode -- the white mare failed -- her trot a staggering stumble grew, --
 The cooking-smoke of even rose and weltered and hung low;
And still we heard the Populzai and still we strained anew,
 And Delhi town was very near, but nearer was the foe.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Yea, Delhi town was very near when Lalun whispered: -- "Slay!
 Lord of my life, the mare sinks fast -- stab deep and let me die!"
But Scindia would not, and the maid tore free and flung away,
 And turning as she fell we heard the clattering Populzai.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Then Scindia checked the gasping mare that rocked and groaned for breath,
 And wheeled to charge and plunged the knife a hand's-breadth in her side --
The hunter and the hunted know how that last pause is death --
 The blood had chilled about her heart, she reared and fell and died.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Our Gods were kind.  Before he heard the maiden's piteous scream
 A log upon the Delhi road, beneath the mare he lay --
Lost mistress and lost battle passed before him like a dream;
 The darkness closed about his eyes -- I bore my King away.
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a 
 
Boh Da Thone was a warrior bold:
His sword and his Snider were bossed with gold,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And the Peacock Banner his henchmen bore
Was stiff with bullion, but stiffer with gore.
 
RHYME a a 
 
He shot at the strong and he slashed at the weak
From the Salween scrub to the Chindwin teak:
 
RHYME a a 
 
He crucified noble, he sacrificed mean,
He filled old ladies with kerosene:
 
RHYME a a 
 
While over the water the papers cried,
"The patriot fights for his countryside!"
 
RHYME a a 
 
But little they cared for the Native Press,
The worn white soldiers in Khaki dress,
 
RHYME a a 
 
Who tramped through the jungle and camped in the byre,
Who died in the swamp and were tombed in the mire,
 
RHYME a a 
 
Who gave up their lives, at the Queen's Command,
For the Pride of their Race and the Peace of the Land.
 
RHYME a a 
 
Now, first of the foemen of Boh Da Thone
Was Captain O'Neil of the "Black Tyrone",
 
RHYME a a 
 
And his was a Company, seventy strong,
Who hustled that dissolute Chief along.
 
RHYME a a 
 
There were lads from Galway and Louth and Meath
Who went to their death with a joke in their teeth,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And worshipped with fluency, fervour, and zeal
The mud on the boot-heels of "Crook" O'Neil.
 
RHYME a a 
 
But ever a blight on their labours lay,
And ever their quarry would vanish away,
 
RHYME a a 
 
Till the sun-dried boys of the Black Tyrone
Took a brotherly interest in Boh Da Thone:
 
RHYME a a 
 
And, sooth, if pursuit in possession ends,
The Boh and his trackers were best of friends.
 
RHYME a a 
 
The word of a scout -- a march by night --
A rush through the mist -- a scattering fight --
 
RHYME a a 
 
A volley from cover -- a corpse in the clearing --
The glimpse of a loin-cloth and heavy jade earring --
 
RHYME a a 
 
The flare of a village -- the tally of slain --
And. . .the Boh was abroad "on the raid" again!
 
RHYME a a 
 
They cursed their luck, as the Irish will,
They gave him credit for cunning and skill,
 
RHYME a a 
 
They buried their dead, they bolted their beef,
And started anew on the track of the thief
 
RHYME a a 
 
Till, in place of the "Kalends of Greece", men said,
"When Crook and his darlings come back with the head."
 
RHYME a a 
 
They had hunted the Boh from the hills to the plain --
He doubled and broke for the hills again:
 
RHYME a a 
 
They had crippled his power for rapine and raid,
They had routed him out of his pet stockade,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And at last, they came, when the Day Star tired,
To a camp deserted -- a village fired.
 
RHYME a a 
 
A black cross blistered the Morning-gold,
And the body upon it was stark and cold.
 
RHYME a a 
 
The wind of the dawn went merrily past,
The high grass bowed her plumes to the blast.
 
RHYME a a 
 
And out of the grass, on a sudden, broke
A spirtle of fire, a whorl of smoke --
 
RHYME a a a 

And Captain O'Neil of the Black Tyrone
Was blessed with a slug in the ulnar-bone --
The gift of his enemy Boh Da Thone.
 
RHYME a a 

(Now a slug that is hammered from telegraph-wire
Is a thorn in the flesh and a rankling fire.)
 
RHYME a a 
 
The shot-wound festered -- as shot-wounds may
In a steaming barrack at Mandalay.
 
RHYME a a 
 
The left arm throbbed, and the Captain swore,
"I'd like to be after the Boh once more!"
 
RHYME a a 
 
The fever held him -- the Captain said,
"I'd give a hundred to look at his head!"
 
RHYME a a 
 
The Hospital punkahs creaked and whirred,
But Babu Harendra (Gomashta) heard.
 
RHYME a a 
 
He thought of the cane-brake, green and dank,
That girdled his home by the Dacca tank.
 
RHYME a a 
 
He thought of his wife and his High School son,
He thought -- but abandoned the thought -- of a gun.
 
RHYME a a 
 
His sleep was broken by visions dread
Of a shining Boh with a silver head.
 
RHYME a a 
 
He kept his counsel and went his way,
And swindled the cartmen of half their pay.
  
RHYME a a 
 
And the months went on, as the worst must do,
And the Boh returned to the raid anew.
 
RHYME a a 
 
But the Captain had quitted the long-drawn strife,
And in far Simoorie had taken a wife.
 
RHYME a a 
 
And she was a damsel of delicate mould,
With hair like the sunshine and heart of gold,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And little she knew the arms that embraced
Had cloven a man from the brow to the waist:
 
RHYME a a 
 
And little she knew that the loving lips
Had ordered a quivering life's eclipse,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And the eye that lit at her lightest breath
Had glared unawed in the Gates of Death.
 
RHYME a a 
 
(For these be matters a man would hide,
As a general rule, from an innocent Bride.)
 
RHYME a a 
 
And little the Captain thought of the past,
And, of all men, Babu Harendra last.
  
RHYME a a 
 
But slow, in the sludge of the Kathun road,
The Government Bullock Train toted its load.
 
RHYME a a 
 
Speckless and spotless and shining with ~ghee~,
In the rearmost cart sat the Babu-jee.
 
RHYME a a 
 
And ever a phantom before him fled
Of a scowling Boh with a silver head.
 
RHYME a a 
 
Then the lead-cart stuck, though the coolies slaved,
And the cartmen flogged and the escort raved;
 
RHYME a a 
 
And out of the jungle, with yells and squeals,
Pranced Boh Da Thone, and his gang at his heels!
 
RHYME a a 
 
Then belching blunderbuss answered back
The Snider's snarl and the carbine's crack,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And the blithe revolver began to sing
To the blade that twanged on the locking-ring,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And the brown flesh blued where the bay'net kissed,
As the steel shot back with a wrench and a twist,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And the great white bullocks with onyx eyes
Watched the souls of the dead arise,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And over the smoke of the fusillade
The Peacock Banner staggered and swayed.
 
RHYME a a 
 
Oh, gayest of scrimmages man may see
Is a well-worked rush on the G.B.T.!
 
RHYME a a 
 
The Babu shook at the horrible sight,
And girded his ponderous loins for flight,
 
RHYME a a 
 
But Fate had ordained that the Boh should start
On a lone-hand raid of the rearmost cart,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And out of that cart, with a bellow of woe,
The Babu fell -- flat on the top of the Boh!
 
RHYME a a 
 
For years had Harendra served the State,
To the growth of his purse and the girth of his ~p]^et~.
 
RHYME a a 
 
There were twenty stone, as the tally-man knows,
On the broad of the chest of this best of Bohs.
 
RHYME a a 
 
And twenty stone from a height discharged
Are bad for a Boh with a spleen enlarged.
 
RHYME a a 
 
Oh, short was the struggle -- severe was the shock --
He dropped like a bullock -- he lay like a block;
 
RHYME a a 
 
And the Babu above him, convulsed with fear,
Heard the labouring life-breath hissed out in his ear.
 
RHYME a a 
 
And thus in a fashion undignified
The princely pest of the Chindwin died.
 
RHYME a a 
 
Turn now to Simoorie where, lapped in his ease,
The Captain is petting the Bride on his knees,
 
RHYME a a 
 
Where the ~whit~ of the bullet, the wounded man's scream
Are mixed as the mist of some devilish dream --
 
RHYME a a 
 
Forgotten, forgotten the sweat of the shambles
Where the hill-daisy blooms and the gray monkey gambols,
 
RHYME a a 
 
From the sword-belt set free and released from the steel,
The Peace of the Lord is with Captain O'Neil.
 
RHYME a a 
 
Up the hill to Simoorie -- most patient of drudges --
The bags on his shoulder, the mail-runner trudges.
 
RHYME a a 
 
"For Captain O'Neil, ~Sahib~.  One hundred and ten
Rupees to collect on delivery."     Then
 
RHYME a a 
 
(Their breakfast was stopped while the screw-jack and hammer
Tore waxcloth, split teak-wood, and chipped out the dammer;)
 
RHYME a a 
 
Open-eyed, open-mouthed, on the napery's snow,
With a crash and a thud, rolled -- the Head of the Boh!
 
RHYME a a 
 
And gummed to the scalp was a letter which ran: --
   "IN FIELDING FORCE SERVICe    ~Encampment~, 10th Jan.
 
RHYME a a 
 
"Dear Sir, -- I have honour to send, ~as you said~,
For final approval (see under) Boh's Head;
 
RHYME a a 
 
"Was took by myself in most bloody affair.
By High Education brought pressure to bear.
 
RHYME a a 
 
"Now violate Liberty, time being bad,
To mail V.P.P. (rupees hundred)  Please add
 
RHYME a a 
 
"Whatever Your Honour can pass.  Price of Blood
Much cheap at one hundred, and children want food;
 
RHYME a a 
 
"So trusting Your Honour will somewhat retain
True love and affection for Govt. Bullock Train,
  
RHYME a a 
 
As the rabbit is drawn to the rattlesnake's power,
As the smoker's eye fills at the opium hour,
 
RHYME a a 
 
As a horse reaches up to the manger above,
As the waiting ear yearns for the whisper of love,
 
RHYME a a 
 
From the arms of the Bride, iron-visaged and slow,
The Captain bent down to the Head of the Boh.
 
RHYME a a 
 
And e'en as he looked on the Thing where It lay
'Twixt the winking new spoons and the napkins' array,
 
RHYME a a 
 
The freed mind fled back to the long-ago days --
The hand-to-hand scuffle -- the smoke and the blaze --
 
RHYME a a 
 
The forced march at night and the quick rush at dawn --
The banjo at twilight, the burial ere morn --
 
RHYME a a 
 
The stench of the marshes -- the raw, piercing smell
When the overhand stabbing-cut silenced the yell --
 
RHYME a a 
 
The oaths of his Irish that surged when they stood
Where the black crosses hung o'er the Kuttamow flood.
 
RHYME a a 
 
As a derelict ship drifts away with the tide
The Captain went out on the Past from his Bride,
 
RHYME a a 
 
Back, back, through the springs to the chill of the year,
When he hunted the Boh from Maloon to Tsaleer.
 
RHYME a a 
 
As the shape of a corpse dimmers up through deep water,
In his eye lit the passionless passion of slaughter,
 
RHYME a a 
 
And men who had fought with O'Neil for the life
Had gazed on his face with less dread than his wife.
 
RHYME a a 
 
For she who had held him so long could not hold him --
Though a four-month Eternity should have controlled him --
 
RHYME a a 
 
But watched the twin Terror -- the head turned to head --
The scowling, scarred Black, and the flushed savage Red --
 
RHYME a a 
 
The spirit that changed from her knowing and flew to
Some grim hidden Past she had never a clue to.
 
RHYME a a 
 
But It knew as It grinned, for he touched it unfearing,
And muttered aloud, "So you kept that jade earring!"
 
RHYME a a 
 
Then nodded, and kindly, as friend nods to friend,
"Old man, you fought well, but you lost in the end."
 
RHYME a a 
 
The visions departed, and Shame followed Passion: --
"He took what I said in this horrible fashion,
 
RHYME a a 
 
"~I'll~ write to Harendra!"  With language unsainted
The Captain came back to the Bride. . .who had fainted. 
 
RHYME a a 
 
And this is a fiction?  No.  Go to Simoorie
And look at their baby, a twelve-month old Houri,
 
RHYME a a 
 
A pert little, Irish-eyed Kathleen Mavournin --
She's always about on the Mall of a mornin' --
 
RHYME a a 
 
And you'll see, if her right shoulder-strap is displaced,
This:  ~Gules~ upon ~argent~, a Boh's Head, ~erased!~
  
TITLE

RHYME a b a b   
 
O woe is me for the merry life
 I led beyond the Bar,
And a treble woe for my winsome wife
 That weeps at Shalimar.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
They have taken away my long jezail,
 My shield and sabre fine,
And heaved me into the Central jail
 For lifting of the kine.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
The steer may low within the byre,
 The Jat may tend his grain,
But there'll be neither loot nor fire
 Till I come back again.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
And God have mercy on the Jat
 When once my fetters fall,
And Heaven defend the farmer's hut
 When I am loosed from thrall.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
It's woe to bend the stubborn back
 Above the grinching quern,
It's woe to hear the leg-bar clack
 And jingle when I turn!
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
But for the sorrow and the shame,
 The brand on me and mine,
I'll pay you back in leaping flame
 And loss of the butchered kine.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
For every cow I spared before
 In charity set free,
If I may reach my hold once more
 I'll reive an honest three.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
For every time I raised the low
 That scared the dusty plain,
By sword and cord, by torch and tow
 I'll light the land with twain!
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
Ride hard, ride hard to Abazai,
 Young ~Sahib~ with the yellow hair --
Lie close, lie close as khuttucks lie,
 Fat herds below Bonair!
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
The one I'll shoot at twilight-tide,
 At dawn I'll drive the other;
The black shall mourn for hoof and hide,
 The white man for his brother.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
'Tis war, red war, I'll give you then,
 War till my sinews fail;
For the wrong you have done to a chief of men,
 And a thief of the Zukka Kheyl.
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
And if I fall to your hand afresh
 I give you leave for the sin,
That you cram my throat with the foul pig's flesh,
 And swing me in the skin!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a * 
 
   . . . At the close of a winter day,
Their anchors down, by London town, the Three Great Captains lay;
And one was Admiral of the North from Solway Firth to Skye,
And one was Lord of the Wessex coast and all the lands thereby,
And one was Master of the Thames from Limehouse to Blackwall,
And he was Captain of the Fleet -- the bravest of them all.
Their good guns guarded their great gray sides that were thirty foot in the sheer,
When there came a certain trading-brig with news of a privateer.
Her rigging was rough with the clotted drift that drives in a Northern breeze,
Her sides were clogged with the lazy weed that spawns in the Eastern seas.
Light she rode in the rude tide-rip, to left and right she rolled,
And the skipper sat on the scuttle-butt and stared at an empty hold.
"I ha' paid Port dues for your Law," quoth he, "and where is the Law ye boast
If I sail unscathed from a heathen port to be robbed on a Christian coast?
Ye have smoked the hives of the Laccadives as we burn the lice in a bunk,
We tack not now to a Gallang prow or a plunging Pei-ho junk;
I had no fear but the seas were clear as far as a sail might fare
Till I met with a lime-washed Yankee brig that rode off Finisterre.
There were canvas blinds to his bow-gun ports to screen the weight he bore,
And the signals ran for a merchantman from Sandy Hook to the Nore.
He would not fly the Rovers' flag -- the bloody or the black,
But now he floated the Gridiron and now he flaunted the Jack.

RHYME a a * 
 
He spoke of the Law as he crimped my crew -- he swore it was only a loan;
But when I would ask for my own again, he swore it was none of my own.
He has taken my little parrakeets that nest beneath the Line,
He has stripped my rails of the shaddock-frails and the green unripened pine;
He has taken my bale of dammer and spice I won beyond the seas,
He has taken my grinning heathen gods -- and what should he want o' these?
My foremast would not mend his boom, my deckhouse patch his boats;
He has whittled the two, this Yank Yahoo, to peddle for shoe-peg oats.
I could not fight for the failing light and a rough beam-sea beside,
But I hulled him once for a clumsy crimp and twice because he lied.
Had I had guns (as I had goods) to work my Christian harm,
I had run him up from his quarter-deck to trade with his own yard-arm;

RHYME a a * 
 
I had nailed his ears to my capstan-head, and ripped them off with a saw,
And soused them in the bilgewater, and served them to him raw;
I had flung him blind in a rudderless boat to rot in the rocking dark,
I had towed him aft of his own craft, a bait for his brother shark;
I had lapped him round with cocoa husk, and drenched him with the oil,
And lashed him fast to his own mast to blaze above my spoil;
I had stripped his hide for my hammock-side, and tasselled his beard i' the mesh,
And spitted his crew on the live bamboo that grows through the gangrened flesh;
I had hove him down by the mangroves brown, where the mud-reef sucks and draws,
Moored by the heel to his own keel to wait for the land-crab's claws!
He is lazar within and lime without, ye can nose him far enow,
For he carries the taint of a musky ship -- the reek of the slaver's dhow!"

RHYME a a * 
 
The skipper looked at the tiering guns and the bulwarks tall and cold,
And the Captains Three full courteously peered down at the gutted hold,
And the Captains Three called courteously from deck to scuttle-butt: --
"Good Sir, we ha' dealt with that merchantman or ever your teeth were cut.
Your words be words of a lawless race, and the Law it standeth thus:
He comes of a race that have never a Law, and he never has boarded us.
We ha' sold him canvas and rope and spar -- we know that his price is fair,
And we know that he weeps for the lack of a Law as he rides off Finisterre.
And since he is damned for a gallows-thief by you and better than you,
We hold it meet that the English fleet should know that we hold him true."
The skipper called to the tall taffrail: -- "And what is that to me?
Did ever you hear of a Yankee brig that rifled a Seventy-three?

RHYME a a * 
 
Do I loom so large from your quarter-deck that I lift like a ship o' the Line?
He has learned to run from a shotted gun and harry such craft as mine.
There is never a Law on the Cocos Keys to hold a white man in,
But we do not steal the niggers' meal, for that is a nigger's sin.
Must he have his Law as a quid to chaw, or laid in brass on his wheel?
Does he steal with tears when he buccaneers? 'Fore Gad, then, why does he steal?"
The skipper bit on a deep-sea word, and the word it was not sweet,
For he could see the Captains Three had signalled to the Fleet.

RHYME a a * 
 
But three and two, in white and blue, the whimpering flags began: --
"We have heard a tale of a -- foreign sail, but he is a merchantman."
The skipper peered beneath his palm and swore by the Great Horn Spoon: --
"'Fore Gad, the Chaplain of the Fleet would bless my picaroon!"
By two and three the flags blew free to lash the laughing air: --
"We have sold our spars to the merchantman -- we know that his price is fair."
The skipper winked his Western eye, and swore by a China storm: --
"They ha' rigged him a Joseph's jury-coat to keep his honour warm."
The halliards twanged against the tops, the bunting bellied broad,
The skipper spat in the empty hold and mourned for a wasted cord.

RHYME a a * 
 
Masthead -- masthead, the signal sped by the line o' the British craft;
The skipper called to his Lascar crew, and put her about and laughed: --
"It's mainsail haul, my bully boys all -- we'll out to the seas again --
Ere they set us to paint their pirate saint, or scrub at his grapnel-chain.
It's fore-sheet free, with her head to the sea, and the swing of the unbought brine
We'll make no sport in an English court till we come as a ship o' the Line:

RHYME a a * 
 
Till we come as a ship o' the Line, my lads, of thirty foot in the sheer,
Lifting again from the outer main with news of a privateer;
Flying his pluck at our mizzen-truck for weft of Admiralty,
Heaving his head for our dipsey-lead in sign that we keep the sea.
Then fore-sheet home as she lifts to the foam -- we stand on the outward tack,
We are paid in the coin of the white man's trade the bezant is hard, ay, and black.
The frigate-bird shall carry my word to the Kling and the Orang-Laut
How a man may sail from a heathen coast to be robbed in a Christian port;
How a man may be robbed in Christian port while Three Great Captains there
Shall dip their flag to a slaver's rag -- to show that his trade is fair!"
 
TITLE

RHYME a b c c b 

 It was our war-ship ~Clampherdown~
 Would sweep the Channel clean,
Wherefore she kept her hatches close
When the merry Channel chops arose,
 To save the bleached marine.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

She had one bow-gun of a hundred ton,
 And a great stern-gun beside;
They dipped their noses deep in the sea,
They racked their stays and stanchions free
 In the wash of the wind-whipped tide.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

It was our war-ship ~Clampherdown~,
 Fell in with a cruiser light
That carried the dainty Hotchkiss gun
And a pair o' heels wherewith to run
 From the grip of a close-fought fight.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

She opened fire at seven miles --
 As ye shoot at a bobbing cork --
And once she fired and twice she fired,
Till the bow-gun drooped like a lily tired
 That lolls upon the stalk.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

"Captain, the bow-gun melts apace,
 The deck-beams break below,
'Twere well to rest for an hour or twain,
And botch the shattered plates again."
 And he answered, "Make it so."
 
RHYME a b c c b 

She opened fire within the mile --
 As ye shoot at the flying duck --
And the great stern-gun shot fair and true,
With the heave of the ship, to the stainless blue,
 And the great stern-turret stuck.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

"Captain, the turret fills with steam,
 The feed-pipes burst below --
You can hear the hiss of the helpless ram,
You can hear the twisted runners jam."
 And he answered, "Turn and go!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 

It was our war-ship ~Clampherdown~,
 And grimly did she roll;
Swung round to take the cruiser's fire
As the White Whale faces the Thresher's ire
 When they war by the frozen Pole.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

"Captain, the shells are falling fast,
 And faster still fall we;
And it is not meet for English stock
To bide in the heart of an eight-day clock
 The death they cannot see."
 
RHYME a b c c b 

"Lie down, lie down, my bold A.B.,
 We drift upon her beam;
We dare not ram, for she can run;
And dare ye fire another gun,
 And die in the peeling steam?"
 
RHYME a b c c b 

It was our war-ship ~Clampherdown~
 That carried an armour-belt;
But fifty feet at stern and bow
Lay bare as the paunch of the purser's sow,
 To the hail of the ~Nordenfeldt~.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

"Captain, they hack us through and through;
 The chilled steel bolts are swift!
We have emptied the bunkers in open sea,
Their shrapnel bursts where our coal should be."
 And he answered, "Let her drift."
 
RHYME a b c c b 

It was our war-ship ~Clampherdown~,
 Swung round upon the tide,
Her two dumb guns glared south and north,
And the blood and the bubbling steam ran forth,
 And she ground the cruiser's side.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

"Captain, they cry, the fight is done,
 They bid you send your sword."
And he answered, "Grapple her stern and bow.
They have asked for the steel.  They shall have it now;
 Out cutlasses and board!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 

It was our war-ship ~Clampherdown~
 Spewed up four hundred men;
And the scalded stokers yelped delight,
As they rolled in the waist and heard the fight
 Stamp o'er their steel-walled pen.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

They cleared the cruiser end to end,
 From conning-tower to hold.
They fought as they fought in Nelson's fleet;
They were stripped to the waist, they were bare to the feet,
 As it was in the days of old.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

It was the sinking ~Clampherdown~
 Heaved up her battered side --
And carried a million pounds in steel,
To the cod and the corpse-fed conger-eel,
 And the scour of the Channel tide.
 
RHYME a b c c b 

It was the crew of the ~Clampherdown~
 Stood out to sweep the sea,
On a cruiser won from an ancient foe,
As it was in the days of long ago,
 And as it still shall be.
 
TITLE

RHYME a a b b 
 
     Seven men from all the world, back to Docks again,
     Rolling down the Ratcliffe Road drunk and raising Cain:
     Give the girls another drink 'fore we sign away --
     We that took the ~Bolivar~ out across the Bay!
 
RHYME a b a b

We put out from Sunderland loaded down with rails;
 We put back to Sunderland 'cause our cargo shifted;
We put out from Sunderland -- met the winter gales --
 Seven days and seven nights to the Start we drifted.

RHYME a a b b 
 
    Racketing her rivets loose, smoke-stack white as snow,
    All the coals adrift adeck, half the rails below,
    Leaking like a lobster-pot, steering like a dray --
    Out we took the ~Bolivar~, out across the Bay!
 
RHYME a b a b

One by one the Lights came up, winked and let us by;
 Mile by mile we waddled on, coal and fo'c'sle short;
Met a blow that laid us down, heard a bulkhead fly;
 Left the ~Wolf~ behind us with a two-foot list to port.

RHYME a a b b 

    Trailing like a wounded duck, working out her soul;
    Clanging like a smithy-shop after every roll;
    Just a funnel and a mast lurching through the spray --
    So we threshed the ~Bolivar~ out across the Bay!
 
RHYME a b a b

'Felt her hog and felt her sag, betted when she'd break;
 Wondered every time she raced if she'd stand the shock;
Heard the seas like drunken men pounding at her strake;
 Hoped the Lord hud keep his thumb on the plummer-block.

RHYME a a b b 

    Banged against the iron decks, bilges choked with coal;
    Flayed and frozen foot and hand, sick of heart and soul;
    Last we prayed she'd buck herself into judgment Day --
    Hi! we cursed the ~Bolivar~ knocking round the Bay!
 
RHYME a b a b

O her nose flung up to sky, groaning to be still --
 Up and down and back we went, never time for breath;
Then the money paid at Lloyd's caught her by the heel,
 And the stars ran round and round dancin' at our death.

RHYME a a b b 

    Aching for an hour's sleep, dozing off between;
    'Heard the rotten rivets draw when she took it green;
    'Watched the compass chase its tail like a cat at play --
    That was on the ~Bolivar~, south across the Bay.
 
RHYME a b a b

Once we saw between the squalls, lyin' head to swell --
 Mad with work and weariness, wishin' they was we --
Some damned Liner's lights go by like a long hotel;
 Cheered her from the ~Bolivar~ swampin' in the sea.

RHYME a a b b 

    Then a grayback cleared us out, then the skipper laughed;
    "Boys, the wheel has gone to Hell -- rig the winches aft!
    Yoke the kicking rudder-head -- get her under way!"
    So we steered her, pulley-haul, out across the Bay!
 
RHYME a a b b 

Just a pack o' rotten plates puttied up with tar,
In we came, an' time enough, 'cross Bilbao Bar.
    Overloaded, undermanned, meant to founder, we
    Euchred God Almighty's storm, bluffed the Eternal Sea!

RHYME a a b b 

     Seven men from all the world, back to town again,
     Rollin' down the Ratcliffe Road drunk and raising Cain:
     Seven men from out of Hell.  Ain't the owners gay,
     'Cause we took the "Bolivar" safe across the Bay?
 
TITLE

RHYME a a *
  
Love and Death once ceased their strife
At the Tavern of Man's Life.
Called for wine, and threw -- alas! --
Each his quiver on the grass.
When the bout was o'er they found
Mingled arrows strewed the ground.
Hastily they gathered then
Each the loves and lives of men.
Ah, the fateful dawn deceived!
Mingled arrows each one sheaved;
Death's dread armoury was stored
With the shafts he most abhorred;
Love's light quiver groaned beneath
Venom-headed darts of Death.
 
RHYME a a a b b 

Thus it was they wrought our woe
At the Tavern long ago.
Tell me, do our masters know,
Loosing blindly as they fly,
Old men love while young men die?
 
TITLE

RHYME a b c b  
 
The dead child lay in the shroud,
 And the widow watched beside;
And her mother slept, and the Channel swept
 The gale in the teeth of the tide.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
But the mother laughed at all.
 "I have lost my man in the sea,
And the child is dead.  Be still," she said,
 "What more can ye do to me?"
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The widow watched the dead,
 And the candle guttered low,
And she tried to sing the Passing Song
 That bids the poor soul go.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
And "Mary take you now," she sang,
 "That lay against my heart."
And "Mary smooth your crib to-night,"
 But she could not say "Depart."
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Then came a cry from the sea,
 But the sea-rime blinded the glass,
And "Heard ye nothing, mother?" she said,
 "'Tis the child that waits to pass."
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
And the nodding mother sighed.
 "'Tis a lambing ewe in the whin,
For why should the christened soul cry out
 That never knew of sin?"
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
"O feet I have held in my hand,
 O hands at my heart to catch,
How should they know the road to go,
 And how should they lift the latch?"
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
They laid a sheet to the door,
 With the little quilt atop,
That it might not hurt from the cold or the dirt,
 But the crying would not stop.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The widow lifted the latch
 And strained her eyes to see,
And opened the door on the bitter shore
 To let the soul go free.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
There was neither glimmer nor ghost,
 There was neither spirit nor spark,
And "Heard ye nothing, mother?" she said,
 "'Tis crying for me in the dark."
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
And the nodding mother sighed:
 "'Tis sorrow makes ye dull;
Have ye yet to learn the cry of the tern,
 Or the wail of the wind-blown gull?"
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
"The terns are blown inland,
 The gray gull follows the plough.
'Twas never a bird, the voice I heard,
 O mother, I hear it now!"
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
"Lie still, dear lamb, lie still;
 The child is passed from harm,
'Tis the ache in your breast that broke your rest,
 And the feel of an empty arm."
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
She put her mother aside,
 "In Mary's name let be!
For the peace of my soul I must go," she said,
 And she went to the calling sea.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
In the heel of the wind-bit pier,
 Where the twisted weed was piled,
She came to the life she had missed by an hour,
 For she came to a little child.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
She laid it into her breast,
 And back to her mother she came,
But it would not feed and it would not heed,
 Though she gave it her own child's name.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
And the dead child dripped on her breast,
 And her own in the shroud lay stark;
And "God forgive us, mother," she said,
 "We let it die in the dark!"
 
TITLE

RHYME a a *
 
When the flush of a new-born sun fell first on Eden's green and gold,
Our father Adam sat under the Tree and scratched with a stick in the mould;
And the first rude sketch that the world had seen was joy to his mighty heart,
Till the Devil whispered behind the leaves, "It's pretty, but is it Art?"
 
RHYME a a *
 
Wherefore he called to his wife, and fled to fashion his work anew --
The first of his race who cared a fig for the first, most dread review;
And he left his lore to the use of his sons -- and that was a glorious gain
When the Devil chuckled "Is it Art?" in the ear of the branded Cain.
 
RHYME a a *
 
They fought and they talked in the North and the South,they talked and they fought in the West,
Till the waters rose on the pitiful land, and the poor Red Clay had rest --
Had rest till that dank blank-canvas dawn when the dove was preened to start,
And the Devil bubbled below the keel:  "It's human, but is it Art?"
 
RHYME a a *
 
They builded a tower to shiver the sky and wrench the stars apart,
Till the Devil grunted behind the bricks:  "It's striking, but is it Art?"
The stone was dropped at the quarry-side and the idle derrick swung,
While each man talked of the aims of Art, and each in an alien tongue.
 
RHYME a a *
 
The tale is as old as the Eden Tree -- and new as the new-cut tooth --
For each man knows ere his lip-thatch grows he is master of Art and Truth;
And each man hears as the twilight nears, to the beat of his dying heart,
The Devil drum on the darkened pane:  "You did it, but was it Art?"
 
RHYME a a *
 
We have learned to whittle the Eden Tree to the shape of a surplice-peg,
We have learned to bottle our parents twain in the yelk of an addled egg,
We know that the tail must wag the dog, for the horse is drawn by the cart;
But the Devil whoops, as he whooped of old:  "It's clever, but is it Art?"
 
RHYME a a *
 
When the flicker of London sun falls faint on the Club-room's green and gold,
The sons of Adam sit them down and scratch with their pens in the mould --
They scratch with their pens in the mould of their graves, and the ink and the anguish start,
For the Devil mutters behind the leaves:  "It's pretty, but is it Art?"
 
RHYME a a *
 
Now, if we could win to the Eden Tree where the Four Great Rivers flow,
And the Wreath of Eve is red on the turf as she left it long ago,
And if we could come when the sentry slept and softly scurry through,
By the favour of God we might know as much -- as our father Adam knew!
 
TITLE

RHYME a b c b 
 
This is the sorrowful story
 Told when the twilight fails
And the monkeys walk together
 Holding their neighbours' tails: --
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Our fathers lived in the forest,
 Foolish people were they,
They went down to the cornland
 To teach the farmers to play.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Our fathers frisked in the millet,
 Our fathers skipped in the wheat,
Our fathers hung from the branches,
 Our fathers danced in the street.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Then came the terrible farmers,
 Nothing of play they knew,
Only. . .they caught our fathers
 And set them to labour too!
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Set them to work in the cornland
 With ploughs and sickles and flails,
Put them in mud-walled prisons
 And -- cut off their beautiful tails!
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Now, we can watch our fathers,
 Sullen and bowed and old,
Stooping over the millet,
 Sharing the silly mould,
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Driving a foolish furrow,
 Mending a muddy yoke,
Sleeping in mud-walled prisons,
 Steeping their food in smoke.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"We may not speak to our fathers,
 For if the farmers knew
They would come up to the forest
 And set us to labour too."
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
This is the horrible story
 Told as the twilight fails
And the monkeys walk together
 Holding their kinsmen's tails.
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
'Twas when the rain fell steady an' the Ark was pitched an' ready,
 That Noah got his orders for to take the bastes below;
He dragged them all together by the horn an' hide an' feather,
 An' all excipt the Donkey was agreeable to go.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
Thin Noah spoke him fairly, thin talked to him sevarely,
 An' thin he cursed him squarely to the glory av the Lord: --
"Divil take the ass that bred you, and the greater ass that fed you --
 Divil go wid you, ye spalpeen!" an' the Donkey went aboard.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
But the wind was always failin', an' 'twas most onaisy sailin',
 An' the ladies in the cabin couldn't stand the stable air;
An' the bastes betwuxt the hatches, they tuk an' died in batches,
 Till Noah said: -- "There's wan av us that hasn't paid his fare!"
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
For he heard a flusteration 'mid the bastes av all creation --
 The trumpetin' av elephints an' bellowin' av whales;
An' he saw forninst the windy whin he wint to stop the shindy
 The Divil wid a stable-fork bedivillin' their tails.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
The Divil cursed outrageous, but Noah said umbrageous: --
 "To what am I indebted for this tenant-right invasion?"
An' the Divil gave for answer: -- "Evict me if you can, sir,
 For I came in wid the Donkey -- on Your Honour's invitation."
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Winds of the World, give answer!  They are whimpering to and fro --
And what should they know of England who only England know? --
The poor little street-bred people that vapour and fume and brag,
They are lifting their heads in the stillness to yelp at the English Flag!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Must we borrow a clout from the Boer -- to plaster anew with dirt?
An Irish liar's bandage, or an English coward's shirt?
We may not speak of England; her Flag's to sell or share.
What is the Flag of England?  Winds of the World, declare!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
The North Wind blew: -- "From Bergen my steel-shod vanguards go;
I chase your lazy whalers home from the Disko floe;
By the great North Lights above me I work the will of God,
And the liner splits on the ice-field or the Dogger fills with cod.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"I barred my gates with iron, I shuttered my doors with flame,
Because to force my ramparts your nutshell navies came;
I took the sun from their presence, I cut them down with my blast,
And they died, but the Flag of England blew free ere the spirit passed.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"The lean white bear hath seen it in the long, long Arctic night,
The musk-ox knows the standard that flouts the Northern Light:
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my bergs to dare,
Ye have but my drifts to conquer.  Go forth, for it is there!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
The South Wind sighed: -- "From the Virgins my mid-sea course was ta'en
Over a thousand islands lost in an idle main,
Where the sea-egg flames on the coral and the long-backed breakers croon
Their endless ocean legends to the lazy, locked lagoon.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"Strayed amid lonely islets, mazed amid outer keys,
I waked the palms to laughter -- I tossed the scud in the breeze --
Never was isle so little, never was sea so lone,
But over the scud and the palm-trees an English flag was flown.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"I have wrenched it free from the halliard to hang for a wisp on the Horn;
I have chased it north to the Lizard -- ribboned and rolled and torn;
I have spread its fold o'er the dying, adrift in a hopeless sea;
I have hurled it swift on the slaver, and seen the slave set free.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"My basking sunfish know it, and wheeling albatross,
Where the lone wave fills with fire beneath the Southern Cross.
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my reefs to dare,
Ye have but my seas to furrow.  Go forth, for it is there!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
The East Wind roared: -- "From the Kuriles, the Bitter Seas, I come,
And me men call the Home-Wind, for I bring the English home.
Look -- look well to your shipping!  By the breath of my mad typhoon
I swept your close-packed Praya and beached your best at Kowloon!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"The reeling junks behind me and the racing seas before,
I raped your richest roadstead -- I plundered Singapore!
I set my hand on the Hoogli; as a hooded snake she rose,
And I flung your stoutest steamers to roost with the startled crows.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"Never the lotus closes, never the wild-fowl wake,
But a soul goes out on the East Wind that died for England's sake --
Man or woman or suckling, mother or bride or maid --
Because on the bones of the English the English Flag is stayed.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"The desert-dust hath dimmed it, the flying wild-ass knows,
The scared white leopard winds it across the taintless snows.
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my sun to dare,
Ye have but my sands to travel.  Go forth, for it is there!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
The West Wind called: -- "In squadrons the thoughtless galleons fly
That bear the wheat and cattle lest street-bred people die.
They make my might their porter, they make my house their path,
Till I loose my neck from their rudder and whelm them all in my wrath.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"I draw the gliding fog-bank as a snake is drawn from the hole,
They bellow one to the other, the frighted ship-bells toll,
For day is a drifting terror till I raise the shroud with my breath,
And they see strange bows above them and the two go locked to death.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"But whether in calm or wrack-wreath, whether by dark or day,
I heave them whole to the conger or rip their plates away,
First of the scattered legions, under a shrieking sky,
Dipping between the rollers, the English Flag goes by.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"The dead dumb fog hath wrapped it -- the frozen dews have kissed --
The naked stars have seen it, a fellow-star in the mist.
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my breath to dare,
Ye have but my waves to conquer.  Go forth, for it is there!"
 
TITLE

RHYME a a * 
 
Help for a patriot distressed, a spotless spirit hurt,
Help for an honourable clan sore trampled in the dirt!
From Queenstown Bay to Donegal, O listen to my song,
The honourable gentlemen have suffered grievous wrong.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Their noble names were mentioned -- O the burning black disgrace! --
By a brutal Saxon paper in an Irish shooting-case;
They sat upon it for a year, then steeled their heart to brave it,
And "coruscating innocence" the learned Judges gave it.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Bear witness, Heaven, of that grim crime beneath the surgeon's knife,
The honourable gentlemen deplored the loss of life!
Bear witness of those chanting choirs that burk and shirk and snigger,
No man laid hand upon the knife or finger to the trigger!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Cleared in the face of all mankind beneath the winking skies,
Like ph]oenixes from Ph]oenix Park (and what lay there) they rise!
Go shout it to the emerald seas -- give word to Erin now,
Her honourable gentlemen are cleared -- and this is how: --
 
RHYME a a * 
 
They only paid the Moonlighter his cattle-hocking price,
They only helped the murderer with counsel's best advice,
But -- sure it keeps their honour white -- the learned Court believes
They never gave a piece of plate to murderers and thieves.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
They never told the ramping crowd to card a woman's hide,
They never marked a man for death -- what fault of theirs he died? --
They only said "intimidate", and talked and went away --
By God, the boys that did the work were braver men than they!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Their sin it was that fed the fire -- small blame to them that heard --
The "bhoys" get drunk on rhetoric, and madden at a word --
They knew whom they were talking at, if they were Irish too,
The gentlemen that lied in Court, they knew, and well they knew.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
They only took the Judas-gold from Fenians out of jail,
They only fawned for dollars on the blood-dyed Clanna-Gael.
If black is black or white is white, in black and white it's down,
They're only traitors to the Queen and rebels to the Crown.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"Cleared", honourable gentlemen!  Be thankful it's no more: --
The widow's curse is on your house, the dead are at your door.
On you the shame of open shame, on you from North to South
The hand of every honest man flat-heeled across your mouth.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"Less black than we were painted"? -- Faith, no word of black was said;
The lightest touch was human blood, and that, you know, runs red.
It's sticking to your fist to-day for all your sneer and scoff,
And by the Judge's well-weighed word you cannot wipe it off.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Hold up those hands of innocence -- go, scare your sheep together,
The blundering, tripping tups that bleat behind the old bell-wether;
And if they snuff the taint and break to find another pen,
Tell them it's tar that glistens so, and daub them yours again!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"The charge is old"? -- As old as Cain -- as fresh as yesterday;
Old as the Ten Commandments -- have ye talked those laws away?
If words are words, or death is death, or powder sends the ball,
You spoke the words that sped the shot -- the curse be on you all.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"Our friends believe"? -- Of course they do -- as sheltered women may;
But have they seen the shrieking soul ripped from the quivering clay?
They! -- If their own front door is shut,  they'll swear the whole world's warm;
What do they know of dread of death or hanging fear of harm?
 
RHYME a a * 
 
The secret half a county keeps, the whisper in the lane,
The shriek that tells the shot went home behind the broken pane,
The dry blood crisping in the sun that scares the honest bees,
And shows the "bhoys" have heard your talk -- what do they know of these?
 
RHYME a a * 
 
But you -- you know -- ay, ten times more; the secrets of the dead,
Black terror on the country-side by word and whisper bred,
The mangled stallion's scream at night, the tail-cropped heifer's low.
Who set the whisper going first?  You know, and well you know!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
My soul!  I'd sooner lie in jail for murder plain and straight,
Pure crime I'd done with my own hand for money, lust, or hate,
Than take a seat in Parliament by fellow-felons cheered,
While one of those "not provens" proved me cleared as you are cleared.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Cleared -- you that "lost" the League accounts -- go, guard our honour still,
Go, help to make our country's laws that broke God's law at will --
One hand stuck out behind the back, to signal "strike again";
The other on your dress-shirt-front to show your heart is clane.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
If black is black or white is white, in black and white it's down,
You're only traitors to the Queen and rebels to the Crown.
If print is print or words are words, the learned Court perpends: --
We are not ruled by murderers, but only -- by their friends.
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Now this is the tale of the Council the German Kaiser decreed,
To ease the strong of their burden, to help the weak in their need,
He sent a word to the peoples, who struggle, and pant, and sweat,
That the straw might be counted fairly and the tally of bricks be set.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
The Lords of Their Hands assembled; from the East and the West they drew --
Baltimore, Lille, and Essen, Brummagem, Clyde, and Crewe.
And some were black from the furnace, and some were brown from the soil,
And some were blue from the dye-vat; but all were wearied of toil.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And the young King said: -- "I have found it, the road to the rest ye seek:
The strong shall wait for the weary, the hale shall halt for the weak;
With the even tramp of an army where no man breaks from the line,
Ye shall march to peace and plenty in the bond of brotherhood -- sign!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
The paper lay on the table, the strong heads bowed thereby,
And a wail went up from the peoples: -- "Ay, sign -- give rest, for we die!"
A hand was stretched to the goose-quill, a fist was cramped to scrawl,
When -- the laugh of a blue-eyed maiden ran clear through the council-hall.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And each one heard Her laughing as each one saw Her plain --
Saidie, Mimi, or Olga, Gretchen, or Mary Jane.
And the Spirit of Man that is in Him to the light of the vision woke;
And the men drew back from the paper, as a Yankee delegate spoke: --
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"There's a girl in Jersey City who works on the telephone;
We're going to hitch our horses and dig for a house of our own,
With gas and water connections, and steam-heat through to the top;
And, W. Hohenzollern, I guess I shall work till I drop."
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And an English delegate thundered: -- "The weak an' the lame be blowed!
I've a berth in the Sou'-West workshops, a home in the Wandsworth Road;
And till the 'sociation has footed my buryin' bill,
I work for the kids an' the missus.  Pull up?  I be damned if I will!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And over the German benches the bearded whisper ran: --
"Lager, der girls und der dollars, dey makes or dey breaks a man.
If Schmitt haf collared der dollars, he collars der girl deremit;
But if Schmitt bust in der pizness, we collars der girl from Schmitt."
 
RHYME a a * 
 
They passed one resolution: -- "Your sub-committee believe
You can lighten the curse of Adam when you've lightened the curse of Eve.
But till we are built like angels, with hammer and chisel and pen,
We will work for ourself and a woman, for ever and ever, amen."
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Now this is the tale of the Council the German Kaiser held --
The day that they razored the Grindstone, the day that the Cat was belled,
The day of the Figs from Thistles, the day of the Twisted Sands,
The day that the laugh of a maiden made light of the Lords of Their Hands.
 
TITLE

RHYME a a * 
 
Now Tomlinson gave up the ghost in his house in Berkeley Square,
And a Spirit came to his bedside and gripped him by the hair --
A Spirit gripped him by the hair and carried him far away,
Till he heard as the roar of a rain-fed ford the roar of the Milky Way:
Till he heard the roar of the Milky Way die down and drone and cease,
And they came to the Gate within the Wall where Peter holds the keys.
"Stand up, stand up now, Tomlinson, and answer loud and high
The good that ye did for the sake of men or ever ye came to die --
The good that ye did for the sake of men in little earth so lone!"
And the naked soul of Tomlinson grew white as a rain-washed bone.
"O I have a friend on earth," he said, "that was my priest and guide,
And well would he answer all for me if he were by my side."
-- "For that ye strove in neighbour-love it shall be written fair,
But now ye wait at Heaven's Gate and not in Berkeley Square:

RHYME a a * 
 
Though we called your friend from his bed this night,  he could not speak for you,
For the race is run by one and one and never by two and two."
Then Tomlinson looked up and down, and little gain was there,
For the naked stars grinned overhead, and he saw that his soul was bare:
The Wind that blows between the worlds, it cut him like a knife,
And Tomlinson took up his tale and spoke of his good in life.
"This I have read in a book," he said, "and that was told to me,
And this I have thought that another man thought of a Prince in Muscovy."
The good souls flocked like homing doves and bade him clear the path,
And Peter twirled the jangling keys in weariness and wrath.

RHYME a a * 
 
"Ye have read, ye have heard, ye have thought," he said, "and the tale is yet to run
By the worth of the body that once ye had, give answer -- what ha' ye done?"
Then Tomlinson looked back and forth, and little good it bore,
For the Darkness stayed at his shoulder-blade and Heaven's Gate before: --
"O this I have felt, and this I have guessed, and this I have heard men say,
And this they wrote that another man wrote of a carl in Norroway."

RHYME a a * 
 
-- "Ye have read, ye have felt, ye have guessed, good lack! Ye have hampered Heaven's Gate;
There's little room between the stars in idleness to prate!
O none may reach by hired speech of neighbour, priest, and kin
Through borrowed deed to God's good meed that lies so fair within;
Get hence, get hence to the Lord of Wrong, for doom has yet to run,
And. . .the faith that ye share with Berkeley Square uphold you, Tomlinson!"
 
 RHYME a a * 
 
The Spirit gripped him by the hair, and sun by sun they fell
Till they came to the belt of Naughty Stars that rim the mouth of Hell:
The first are red with pride and wrath, the next are white with pain,
But the third are black with clinkered sin that cannot burn again:
They may hold their path, they may leave their path, with never a soul to mark,
They may burn or freeze, but they must not cease  in the Scorn of the Outer Dark.
The Wind that blows between the worlds, it nipped him to the bone,
And he yearned to the flare of Hell-Gate  there as the light of his own hearth-stone.

RHYME a a * 
 
The Devil he sat behind the bars, where the desperate legions drew,
But he caught the hasting Tomlinson and would not let him through.
"Wot ye the price of good pit-coal that I must pay?" said he,
"That ye rank yoursel' so fit for Hell and ask no leave of me?
I am all o'er-sib to Adam's breed that ye should give me scorn,
For I strove with God for your First Father the day that he was born.
Sit down, sit down upon the slag, and answer loud and high
The harm that ye did to the Sons of Men or ever you came to die."
And Tomlinson looked up and up, and saw against the night
The belly of a tortured star blood-red in Hell-Mouth light;
And Tomlinson looked down and down, and saw beneath his feet
The frontlet of a tortured star milk-white in Hell-Mouth heat.
"O I had a love on earth," said he, "that kissed me to my fall,
And if ye would call my love to me I know she would answer all."

RHYME a a * 
 
-- "All that ye did in love forbid it shall be written fair,
But now ye wait at Hell-Mouth Gate and not in Berkeley Square:
Though we whistled your love from her bed to-night, I trow she would not run,
For the sin ye do by two and two ye must pay for one by one!"
The Wind that blows between the worlds, it cut him like a knife,
And Tomlinson took up the tale and spoke of his sin in life: --
"Once I ha' laughed at the power of Love and twice at the grip of the Grave,
And thrice I ha' patted my God on the head that men might call me brave."
The Devil he blew on a brandered soul and set it aside to cool: --
"Do ye think I would waste my good pit-coal on the hide of a brain-sick fool?

RHYME a a * 
 
I see no worth in the hobnailed mirth or the jolthead jest ye did
That I should waken my gentlemen that are sleeping three on a grid."
Then Tomlinson looked back and forth, and there was little grace,
For Hell-Gate filled the houseless Soul with the Fear of Naked Space.
"Nay, this I ha' heard," quo'  Tomlinson, "and this was noised abroad,
And this I ha' got from a Belgian book on the word of a dead French lord."
-- "Ye ha' heard, ye ha' read, ye ha' got, good lack! and the tale begins afresh --
Have ye sinned one sin for the pride o' the eye  or the sinful lust of the flesh?"
Then Tomlinson he gripped the bars and yammered, "Let me in --
For I mind that I borrowed my neighbour's wife to sin the deadly sin."
The Devil he grinned behind the bars, and banked the fires high:
"Did ye read of that sin in a book?" said he; and Tomlinson said, "Ay!"
The Devil he blew upon his nails, and the little devils ran,
And he said:  "Go husk this whimpering thief that comes in the guise of a man:
Winnow him out 'twixt star and star, and sieve his proper worth:
There's sore decline in Adam's line if this be spawn of earth."
Empusa's crew, so naked-new they may not face the fire,
But weep that they bin too small to sin to the height of their desire,

RHYME a a * 
 
Over the coal they chased the Soul, and racked it all abroad,
As children rifle a caddis-case or the raven's foolish hoard.
And back they came with the tattered Thing, as children after play,
And they said:  "The soul that he got from God he has bartered clean away.
We have threshed a stook of print and book, and winnowed a chattering wind
And many a soul wherefrom he stole, but his we cannot find:
We have handled him, we have dandled him, we have seared him to the bone,
And sure if tooth and nail show truth he has no soul of his own."
The Devil he bowed his head on his breast and rumbled deep and low: --
"I'm all o'er-sib to Adam's breed that I should bid him go.
Yet close we lie, and deep we lie, and if I gave him place,
My gentlemen that are so proud would flout me to my face;

RHYME a a * 
 
They'd call my house a common stews and me a careless host,
And -- I would not anger my gentlemen for the sake of a shiftless ghost."
The Devil he looked at the mangled Soul that prayed to feel the flame,
And he thought of Holy Charity, but he thought of his own good name: --
"Now ye could haste my coal to waste, and sit ye down to fry:
Did ye think of that theft for yourself?" said he; and Tomlinson said, "Ay!"
The Devil he blew an outward breath, for his heart was free from care: --
"Ye have scarce the soul of a louse," he said,  "but the roots of sin are there,

RHYME a a * 
 
And for that sin should ye come in were I the lord alone.
But sinful pride has rule inside -- and mightier than my own.
Honour and Wit, fore-damned they sit, to each his priest and whore:
Nay, scarce I dare myself go there, and you they'd torture sore.
Ye are neither spirit nor spirk," he said; "ye are neither book nor brute --
Go, get ye back to the flesh again for the sake of Man's repute.
I'm all o'er-sib to Adam's breed that I should mock your pain,
But look that ye win to worthier sin ere ye come back again.

RHYME a a * 
 
Get hence, the hearse is at your door -- the grim black stallions wait --
They bear your clay to place to-day.  Speed, lest ye come too late!
Go back to Earth with a lip unsealed -- go back with an open eye,
And carry my word to the Sons of Men or ever ye come to die:
That the sin they do by two and two they must pay for one by one --
And. . .the God that you took from a printed book be with you, Tomlinson!"
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
My new-cut ashlar takes the light
 Where crimson-blank the windows flare;
By my own work, before the night,
 Great Overseer I make my prayer.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
If there be good in that I wrought,
 Thy hand compelled it, Master, Thine;
Where I have failed to meet Thy thought
 I know, through Thee, the blame is mine.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
One instant's toil to Thee denied
 Stands all Eternity's offence,
Of that I did with Thee to guide
 To Thee, through Thee, be excellence.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Who, lest all thought of Eden fade,
 Bring'st Eden to the craftsman's brain,
Godlike to muse o'er his own trade
 And Manlike stand with God again.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
The depth and dream of my desire,
 The bitter paths wherein I stray,
Thou knowest Who hast made the Fire,
 Thou knowest Who hast made the Clay!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
One stone the more swings to her place
 In that dread Temple of Thy Worth --
It is enough that through Thy grace
 I saw naught common on Thy earth.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Take not that vision from my ken;
 Oh whatsoe'er may spoil or speed,
Help me to need no aid from men
 That I may help such men as need!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c b *
  
There's a whisper down the field where the year has shot her yield,
 And the ricks stand gray to the sun,
Singing: -- "Over then, come over, for the bee has quit the clover,
 And your English summer's done."
    You have heard the beat of the off-shore wind,
    And the thresh of the deep-sea rain;
    You have heard the song -- how long! how long?
    Pull out on the trail again!
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
   Ha' done with the Tents of Shem, dear lass,
   We've seen the seasons through,
   And it's time to turn on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
   Pull out, pull out, on the Long Trail -- the trail that is always new.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
It's North you may run to the rime-ringed sun,
 Or South to the blind Horn's hate;
Or East all the way into Mississippi Bay,
 Or West to the Golden Gate;
    Where the blindest bluffs hold good, dear lass,
    And the wildest tales are true,
    And the men bulk big on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
    And life runs large on the Long Trail -- the trail that is always new.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
The days are sick and cold, and the skies are gray and old,
 And the twice-breathed airs blow damp;
And I'd sell my tired soul for the bucking beam-sea roll
 Of a black Bilbao tramp;
    With her load-line over her hatch, dear lass,
    And a drunken Dago crew,
    And her nose held down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail
    From Cadiz Bar on the Long Trail -- the trail that is always new.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
There be triple ways to take, of the eagle or the snake,
 Or the way of a man with a maid;
But the fairest way to me is a ship's upon the sea
 In the heel of the North-East Trade.
    Can you hear the crash on her bows, dear lass,
    And the drum of the racing screw,
    As she ships it green on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
    As she lifts and 'scends on the Long Trail -- the trail that is always new?
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
See the shaking funnels roar, with the Peter at the fore,
 And the fenders grind and heave,
And the derricks clack and grate, as the tackle hooks the crate,
 And the fall-rope whines through the sheave;
    It's "Gang-plank up and in," dear lass,
    It's "Hawsers warp her through!"
    And it's "All clear aft" on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
    We're backing down on the Long Trail -- the trail that is always new.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
O the mutter overside, when the port-fog holds us tied,
 And the sirens hoot their dread!
When foot by foot we creep o'er the hueless viewless deep
 To the sob of the questing lead!
    It's down by the Lower Hope, dear lass,
    With the Gunfleet Sands in view,
    Till the Mouse swings green on the old trail,      our own trail, the out trail,
    And the Gull Light lifts on the Long Trail --     the trail that is always new.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
O the blazing tropic night, when the wake's a welt of light
 That holds the hot sky tame,
And the steady fore-foot snores through the planet-powdered floors
 Where the scared whale flukes in flame!
    Her plates are scarred by the sun, dear lass,
    And her ropes are taut with the dew,
    For we're booming down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
    We're sagging south on the Long Trail -- the trail that is always new.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
Then home, get her home, where the drunken rollers comb,
 And the shouting seas drive by,
And the engines stamp and ring, and the wet bows reel and swing,
 And the Southern Cross rides high!
    Yes, the old lost stars wheel back, dear lass,
    That blaze in the velvet blue.
    They're all old friends on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
    They're God's own guides on the Long Trail --      the trail that is always new.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
Fly forward, O my heart, from the Foreland to the Start --
 We're steaming all-too slow,
And it's twenty thousand mile to our little lazy isle
 Where the trumpet-orchids blow!
    You have heard the call of the off-shore wind,
    And the voice of the deep-sea rain;
    You have heard the song -- how long! how long?
    Pull out on the trail again!
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
   The Lord knows what we may find, dear lass,
   And The Deuce knows what we may do --
   But we're back once more on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
   We're down, hull down on the Long Trail -- the trail that is always new.
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a b a b
 
     The Cities are full of pride,
      Challenging each to each --
     This from her mountain-side,
      That from her burthened beach.
 
RHYME a b a b a b 

     They count their ships full tale --
      Their corn and oil and wine,
     Derrick and loom and bale,
      And rampart's gun-flecked line;
     City by City they hail:
      "Hast aught to match with mine?"

RHYME a b a b 

     And the men that breed from them
      They traffic up and down,
     But cling to their cities' hem
      As a child to their mother's gown.
 
RHYME a b a b a b 

     When they talk with the stranger bands,
      Dazed and newly alone;
     When they walk in the stranger lands,
      By roaring streets unknown;
     Blessing her where she stands
      For strength above their own.
 
RHYME a b a b a b 

     (On high to hold her fame
      That stands all fame beyond,
     By oath to back the same,
      Most faithful-foolish-fond;
     Making her mere-breathed name
      Their bond upon their bond.)
 
RHYME a b a b a b 

     So thank I God my birth
      Fell not in isles aside --
     Waste headlands of the earth,
      Or warring tribes untried --
     But that she lent me worth
      And gave me right to pride.
 
RHYME a b a b 

     Surely in toil or fray
      Under an alien sky,
     Comfort it is to say:
      "Of no mean city am I!"
 
RHYME a b a b a b 

     (Neither by service nor fee
      Come I to mine estate --
     Mother of Cities to me,
      For I was born in her gate,
     Between the palms and the sea,
      Where the world-end steamers wait.)
 
RHYME a b a b 

     Now for this debt I owe,
      And for her far-borne cheer
     Must I make haste and go
      With tribute to her pier.
 
RHYME a b a b c d d c 

     And she shall touch and remit
      After the use of kings
     (Orderly, ancient, fit)
      My deep-sea plunderings,
     And purchase in all lands.
      And this we do for a sign
     Her power is over mine,
      And mine I hold at her hands!
 
RHYME a b c c b  
 
     Fair is our lot -- O goodly is our heritage!
     (Humble ye, my people, and be fearful in your mirth!)
      For the Lord our God Most High
      He hath made the deep as dry,
     He hath smote for us a pathway to the ends of all the Earth!
 
RHYME a b c c b 

     Yea, though we sinned -- and our rulers went from righteousness --
     Deep in all dishonour though we stained our garments' hem.
      Oh be ye not dismayed,
      Though we stumbled and we strayed,
     We were led by evil counsellors -- the Lord shall deal with them!
 
RHYME a b c c b 

     Hold ye the Faith -- the Faith our Fathers seal]\ed us;
     Whoring not with visions -- overwise and overstale.
      Except ye pay the Lord
      Single heart and single sword,
     Of your children in their bondage shall He ask them treble-tale!
 
RHYME a b c c b 

     Keep ye the Law -- be swift in all obedience --
     Clear the land of evil, drive the road and bridge the ford.
      Make ye sure to each his own
      That he reap where he hath sown;
     By the peace among Our peoples let men know we serve the Lord!
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
     Hear now a song -- a song of broken interludes --
     A song of little cunning; of a singer nothing worth.
      Through the naked words and mean
      May ye see the truth between
     As the singer knew and touched it in the ends of all the Earth!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
Our brows are bound with spindrift and the weed is on our knees;
Our loins are battered 'neath us by the swinging, smoking seas.
From reef and rock and skerry -- over headland, ness, and voe --
The Coastwise Lights of England watch the ships of England go!
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
Through the endless summer evenings, on the lineless, level floors;
Through the yelling Channel tempest when the siren hoots and roars --
By day the dipping house-flag and by night the rocket's trail --
As the sheep that graze behind us so we know them where they hail.
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
We bridge across the dark and bid the helmsman have a care,
The flash that wheeling inland wakes his sleeping wife to prayer;
From our vexed eyries, head to gale, we bind in burning chains
The lover from the sea-rim drawn -- his love in English lanes.
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
We greet the clippers wing-and-wing that race the Southern wool;
We warn the crawling cargo-tanks of Bremen, Leith, and Hull;
To each and all our equal lamp at peril of the sea --
The white wall-sided war-ships or the whalers of Dundee!
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
Come up, come in from Eastward, from the guardports of the Morn!
Beat up, beat in from Southerly, O gipsies of the Horn!
Swift shuttles of an Empire's loom that weave us, main to main,
The Coastwise Lights of England give you welcome back again!
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
Go, get you gone up-Channel with the sea-crust on your plates;
Go, get you into London with the burden of your freights!
Haste, for they talk of Empire there, and say, if any seek,
The Lights of England sent you and by silence shall ye speak!
 
TITLE

RHYME a a b c b 
 
     Hear now the Song of the Dead -- in the North by the torn berg-edges --
     They that look still to the Pole, asleep by their hide-stripped sledges.
     Song of the Dead in the South -- in the sun by their skeleton horses,
     Where the warrigal whimpers and bays through the dust
       of the sear river-courses.
 
RHYME a a *
 
We were dreamers, dreaming greatly, in the man-stifled town;
We yearned beyond the sky-line where the strange roads go down.
Came the Whisper, came the Vision, came the Power with the Need,
Till the Soul that is not man's soul was lent us to lead.
As the deer breaks -- as the steer breaks -- from the herd where they graze,
In the faith of little children we went on our ways.
Then the wood failed -- then the food failed -- then the last water dried --
In the faith of little children we lay down and died.
On the sand-drift -- on the veldt-side -- in the fern-scrub we lay,
That our sons might follow after by the bones on the way.
Follow after -- follow after!  We have watered the root,
And the bud has come to blossom that ripens for fruit!
Follow after -- we are waiting, by the trails that we lost,
For the sounds of many footsteps, for the tread of a host.
Follow after -- follow after -- for the harvest is sown:
By the bones about the wayside ye shall come to your own!
 
RHYME a b c a b 

     When Drake went down to the Horn
      And England was crowned thereby,
     'Twixt seas unsailed and shores unhailed
      Our Lodge -- our Lodge was born
      (And England was crowned thereby!)
 
RHYME a b c a b 

     Which never shall close again
      By day nor yet by night,
     While man shall take his life to stake
      At risk of shoal or main
      (By day nor yet by night).
 
RHYME a b c a b 

     But standeth even so
      As now we witness here,
     While men depart, of joyful heart,
      Adventure for to know
      (As now bear witness here!)
 
TITLE

RHYME a a b b  
 
The wrecks dissolve above us; their dust drops down from afar --
Down to the dark, to the utter dark, where the blind white sea-snakes are.
There is no sound, no echo of sound, in the deserts of the deep,
Or the great gray level plains of ooze where the shell-burred cables creep.
 
RHYME a b a b 

Here in the womb of the world -- here on the tie-ribs of earth
 Words, and the words of men, flicker and flutter and beat --
Warning, sorrow and gain, salutation and mirth --
 For a Power troubles the Still that has neither voice nor feet.

RHYME a b a b 

They have wakened the timeless Things; they have killed their father Time;
 Joining hands in the gloom, a league from the last of the sun.
Hush!  Men talk to-day o'er the waste of the ultimate slime,
 And a new Word runs between:  whispering, "Let us be one!"
 
 
TITLE

RHYME a a *
 
One from the ends of the earth -- gifts at an open door --
Treason has much, but we, Mother, thy sons have more!
From the whine of a dying man, from the snarl of a wolf-pack freed,
Turn, and the world is thine.  Mother, be proud of thy seed!
Count, are we feeble or few?  Hear, is our speech so rude?
Look, are we poor in the land?  Judge, are we men of The Blood?
 
RHYME a a *
 
Those that have stayed at thy knees, Mother, go call them in --
We that were bred overseas wait and would speak with our kin.
Not in the dark do we fight -- haggle and flout and gibe;
Selling our love for a price, loaning our hearts for a bribe.
Gifts have we only to-day -- Love without promise or fee --
Hear, for thy children speak, from the uttermost parts of the sea!
 
TITLE

RHYME a b a b 
 
Royal and Dower-royal, I the Queen
 Fronting thy richest sea with richer hands --
A thousand mills roar through me where I glean
 All races from all lands.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Me the Sea-captain loved, the River built,
 Wealth sought and Kings adventured life to hold.
Hail, England!  I am Asia -- Power on silt,
 Death in my hands, but Gold!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Clive kissed me on the mouth and eyes and brow,
 Wonderful kisses, so that I became
Crowned above Queens -- a withered beldame now,
 Brooding on ancient fame.
 
RHYME a b a b 
  
Hail, Mother!  Do they call me rich in trade?
 Little care I, but hear the shorn priest drone,
And watch my silk-clad lovers, man by maid,
 Laugh 'neath my Shwe Dagon.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Hail, Mother!  East and West must seek my aid
 Ere the spent gear may dare the ports afar.
The second doorway of the wide world's trade
 Is mine to loose or bar.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Hail, Mother!  Hold me fast; my Praya sleeps
  Under innumerable keels to-day.
Yet guard (and landward), or to-morrow sweeps
  Thy war-ships down the bay!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Into the mist my guardian prows put forth,
 Behind the mist my virgin ramparts lie,
The Warden of the Honour of the North,
 Sleepless and veiled am I!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Peace is our portion.  Yet a whisper rose,
 Foolish and causeless, half in jest, half hate.
Now wake we and remember mighty blows,
 And, fearing no man, wait!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
From East to West the circling word has passed,
 Till West is East beside our land-locked blue;
From East to West the tested chain holds fast,
 The well-forged link rings true!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Hail!  Snatched and bartered oft from hand to hand,
 I dream my dream, by rock and heath and pine,
Of Empire to the northward.  Ay, one land
 From Lion's Head to Line!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Greeting!  Nor fear nor favour won us place,
 Got between greed of gold and dread of drouth,
Loud-voiced and reckless as the wild tide-race
 That whips our harbour-mouth!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Greeting!  My birth-stain have I turned to good;
 Forcing strong wills perverse to steadfastness:
The first flush of the tropics in my blood,
 And at my feet Success!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
The northern stirp beneath the southern skies --
 I build a Nation for an Empire's need,
Suffer a little, and my land shall rise,
 Queen over lands indeed!
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Man's love first found me; man's hate made me Hell;
 For my babes' sake I cleansed those infamies.
Earnest for leave to live and labour well,
 God flung me peace and ease.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Last, loneliest, loveliest, exquisite, apart --
 On us, on us the unswerving season smiles,
Who wonder 'mid our fern why men depart
 To seek the Happy Isles!

TITLE
 
RHYME a a *
  
Truly ye come of The Blood; slower to bless than to ban;
Little used to lie down at the bidding of any man.
Flesh of the flesh that I bred, bone of the bone that I bare;
Stark as your sons shall be -- stern as your fathers were.
Deeper than speech our love, stronger than life our tether,
But we do not fall on the neck nor kiss when we come together.
My arm is nothing weak, my strength is not gone by;
Sons, I have borne many sons, but my dugs are not dry.
Look, I have made ye a place and opened wide the doors,
That ye may talk together, your Barons and Councillors --
Wards of the Outer March, Lords of the Lower Seas,
Ay, talk to your gray mother that bore you on her knees! --

RHYME a a *
  
That ye may talk together, brother to brother's face --
Thus for the good of your peoples -- thus for the Pride of the Race.
Also, we will make promise.  So long as The Blood endures,
I shall know that your good is mine:  ye shall feel that my strength is yours:
In the day of Armageddon, at the last great fight of all,
That Our House stand together and the pillars do not fall.
Draw now the threefold knot firm on the ninefold bands,
And the Law that ye make shall be law after the rule of your lands.
This for the waxen Heath, and that for the Wattle-bloom,
This for the Maple-leaf, and that for the southern Broom.

RHYME a a *
  
The Law that ye make shall be law and I do not press my will,
Because ye are Sons of The Blood and call me Mother still.
Now must ye speak to your kinsmen and they must speak to you,
After the use of the English, in straight-flung words and few.
Go to your work and be strong, halting not in your ways,
Balking the end half-won for an instant dole of praise.
Stand to your work and be wise -- certain of sword and pen,
Who are neither children nor Gods, but men in a world of men!
 
TITLE

RHYME a a b b  
 
Mine was the woman to me, darkling I found 
Haling her dumb from the camp, took her and bound 
Hot rose her tribe on our track ere I had proved 
Hearing her laugh in the gloom, greatly I loved 
 
RHYME a a b b  
 
Swift through the forest we ran; none stood to guard 
Few were my people and far; then the flood barred 
Him we call Son of the Sea, sullen and swollen.
Panting we waited the death, stealer and stolen.
 
RHYME a a b b  
 
Yet ere they came to my lance laid for the slaughter,
Lightly she leaped to a log lapped in the water;
Holding on high and apart skins that arrayed 
Called she the God of the Wind that He should aid 
 
RHYME a a b b  
 
Life had the tree at that word (Praise we the Giver!)
Otter-like left he the bank for the full river.
Far fell their axes behind, flashing and ringing,
Wonder was on me and fear -- yet she was singing!
 
RHYME a a b b  
 
Low lay the land we had left.  Now the blue bound us,
Even the Floor of the Gods level around us.
Whisper there was not, nor word, shadow nor showing,
Till the light stirred on the deep, glowing and growing.
 
RHYME a a b b  
 
Then did He leap to His place flaring from under,
He the Compeller, the Sun, bared to our wonder.
Nay, not a league from our eyes blinded with gazing,
Cleared He the gate of the world, huge and amazing!
 
RHYME a a b b  
 
This we beheld (and we live) -- the Pit of the Burning!
Then the God spoke to the tree for our returning;
Back to the beach of our flight, fearless and slowly,
Back to our slayers went he:  but we were holy.
 
RHYME a a b b  
 
Men that were hot in that hunt, women that followed,
Babes that were promised our bones, trembled and wallowed:
Over the necks of the Tribe crouching and fawning --
Prophet and priestess we came back from the dawning!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Thus said The Lord in the Vault above the Cherubim
 Calling to the Angels and the Souls in their degree:
  "Lo!  Earth has passed away
  On the smoke of Judgment Day.
 That Our word may be established shall We gather up the sea?"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Loud sang the souls of the jolly, jolly mariners:
 "Plague upon the hurricane that made us furl and flee!
  But the war is done between us,
  In the deep the Lord hath seen us --
 Our bones we'll leave the barracout', and God may sink the sea!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Then said the soul of Judas that betray]\ed Him:
 "Lord, hast Thou forgotten Thy covenant with me?
  How once a year I go
  To cool me on the floe?
 And Ye take my day of mercy if Ye take away the sea!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Then said the soul of the Angel of the Off-shore Wind:
 (He that bits the thunder when the bull-mouthed breakers flee):
  "I have watch and ward to keep
  O'er Thy wonders on the deep,
 And Ye take mine honour from me if Ye take away the sea!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Loud sang the souls of the jolly, jolly mariners:
 "Nay, but we were angry, and a hasty folk are we!
  If we worked the ship together
  Till she foundered in foul weather,
 Are we babes that we should clamour for a vengeance on the sea?"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Then said the souls of the slaves that men threw overboard:
 "Kennelled in the picaroon a weary band were we;
  But Thy arm was strong to save,
  And it touched us on the wave,
 And we drowsed the long tides idle till Thy Trumpets tore the sea."
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Then cried the soul of the stout Apostle Paul to God:
 "Once we frapped a ship, and she laboured woundily.
  There were fourteen score of these,
  And they blessed Thee on their knees,
 When they learned Thy Grace and Glory under Malta by the sea!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Loud sang the souls of the jolly, jolly mariners,
 Plucking at their harps, and they plucked unhandily:
  "Our thumbs are rough and tarred,
  And the tune is something hard --
 May we lift a Deep-sea Chantey such as seamen use at sea?"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Then said the souls of the gentlemen-adventurers --
 Fettered wrist to bar all for red iniquity:
  "Ho, we revel in our chains
  O'er the sorrow that was Spain's;
 Heave or sink it, leave or drink it, we were masters of the sea!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Up spake the soul of a gray Gothavn 'speckshioner --
 (He that led the flinching in the fleets of fair Dundee):
  "Oh, the ice-blink white and near,
  And the bowhead breaching clear!
 Will Ye whelm them all for wantonness that wallow in the sea?"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Loud sang the souls of the jolly, jolly mariners,
 Crying:  "Under Heaven, here is neither lead nor lee!
  Must we sing for evermore
  On the windless, glassy floor?
 Take back your golden fiddles and we'll beat to open sea!"
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Then stooped the Lord, and He called the good sea up to Him,
 And 'stablished his borders unto all eternity,
  That such as have no pleasure
  For to praise the Lord by measure,
 They may enter into galleons and serve Him on the sea.
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
Sun, wind, and cloud shall fail not from the face of it,
      Stinging, ringing spindrift, nor the fulmar flying free;
       And the ships shall go abroad
       To the Glory of the Lord
      Who heard the silly sailor-folk and gave them back their sea!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a b c b *  
 
King Solomon drew merchantmen,
 Because of his desire
For peacocks, apes, and ivory,
 From Tarshish unto Tyre:
With cedars out of Lebanon
 Which Hiram rafted down,
But we be only sailormen
 That use in London Town.
 
RHYME a b a b 

     Coastwise -- cross-seas -- round the world and back again --
      Where the flaw shall head us or the full Trade suits --
     Plain-sail -- storm-sail -- lay your board and tack again --
      And that's the way we'll pay Paddy Doyle for his boots!
 
RHYME a b c b *

We bring no store of ingots,
 Of spice or precious stones,
But that we have we gathered
 With sweat and aching bones:
In flame beneath the tropics,
 In frost upon the floe,
And jeopardy of every wind
 That does between them go.
 
RHYME a b c b *

And some we got by purchase,
 And some we had by trade,
And some we found by courtesy
 Of pike and carronade --
At midnight, 'mid-sea meetings,
 For charity to keep,
And light the rolling homeward-bound
 That rode a foot too deep.
 
RHYME a b c b *

By sport of bitter weather
 We're walty, strained, and scarred
From the kentledge on the kelson
 To the slings upon the yard.
Six oceans had their will of us
 To carry all away --
Our galley's in the Baltic,
 And our boom's in Mossel Bay!
 
RHYME a b c b *

We've floundered off the Texel,
 Awash with sodden deals,
We've slipped from Valparaiso
 With the Norther at our heels:
We've ratched beyond the Crossets
 That tusk the Southern Pole,
And dipped our gunnels under
 To the dread Agulhas roll.
 
RHYME a b c b *

Beyond all outer charting
 We sailed where none have sailed,
And saw the land-lights burning
 On islands none have hailed;
Our hair stood up for wonder,
 But, when the night was done,
There danced the deep to windward
 Blue-empty 'neath the sun!
 
RHYME a b c b *

Strange consorts rode beside us
 And brought us evil luck;
The witch-fire climbed our channels,
 And flared on vane and truck:
Till, through the red tornado,
 That lashed us nigh to blind,
We saw The Dutchman plunging,
 Full canvas, head to wind!
 
RHYME a b c b *

We've heard the Midnight Leadsman
 That calls the black deep down --
Ay, thrice we've heard The Swimmer,
 The Thing that may not drown.
On frozen bunt and gasket
 The sleet-cloud drave her hosts,
When, manned by more than signed with us,
 We passed the Isle o' Ghosts!
 
RHYME a b c b *

And north, amid the hummocks,
 A biscuit-toss below,
We met the silent shallop
 That frighted whalers know;
For, down a cruel ice-lane,
 That opened as he sped,
We saw dead Henry Hudson
 Steer, North by West, his dead.
 
RHYME a b c b *

So dealt God's waters with us
 Beneath the roaring skies,
So walked His signs and marvels
 All naked to our eyes:
But we were heading homeward
 With trade to lose or make --
Good Lord, they slipped behind us
 In the tailing of our wake!
 
RHYME a b c b *

Let go, let go the anchors;
 Now shamed at heart are we
To bring so poor a cargo home
 That had for gift the sea!
Let go the great bow-anchors --
 Ah, fools were we and blind --
The worst we stored with utter toil,
 The best we left behind!
 
RHYME a b a b 

     Coastwise -- cross-seas -- round the world and back again,
      Whither flaw shall fail us or the Trades drive down:
     Plain-sail -- storm-sail -- lay your board and tack again --
      And all to bring a cargo up to London Town!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
I sent a message to my dear --
 A thousand leagues and more to Her --
The dumb sea-levels thrilled to hear,
 And Lost Atlantis bore to Her.
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
Behind my message hard I came,
 And nigh had found a grave for me;
But that I launched of steel and flame
 Did war against the wave for me.
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
Uprose the deep, by gale on gale,
 To bid me change my mind again --
He broke his teeth along my rail,
 And, roaring, swung behind again.
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
I stayed the sun at noon to tell
 My way across the waste of it;
I read the storm before it fell
 And made the better haste of it.
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
Afar, I hailed the land at night --
 The towers I built had heard of me --
And, ere my rocket reached its height,
 Had flashed my Love the word of me.
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
Earth sold her chosen men of strength
 (They lived and strove and died for me)
To drive my road a nation's length,
 And toss the miles aside for me.
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
I snatched their toil to serve my needs --
 Too slow their fleetest flew for me --
I tired twenty smoking steeds,
 And bade them bait a new for me.
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
I sent the lightnings forth to see
 Where hour by hour She waited me.
Among ten million one was She,
 And surely all men hated me!
 
RHYME a b a b  
 
Dawn ran to meet me at my goal --
 Ah, day no tongue shall tell again!
And little folk of little soul
 Rose up to buy and sell again!

TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c b *

     We've drunk to the Queen -- God bless her! --
      We've drunk to our mothers' land;
     We've drunk to our English brother
      (But he does not understand);
     We've drunk to the wide creation,
      And the Cross swings low for the morn;
     Last toast, and of obligation,
      A health to the Native-born!
 
RHYME a b c b *

     They change their skies above them,
      But not their hearts that roam!
     We learned from our wistful mothers
      To call old England "home";
     We read of the English skylark,
      Of the spring in the English lanes,
     But we screamed with the painted lories
      As we rode on the dusty plains!
 
RHYME a b c b *

     They passed with their old-world legends --
      Their tales of wrong and dearth --
     Our fathers held by purchase,
      But we by the right of birth;
     Our heart's where they rocked our cradle,
      Our love where we spent our toil,
     And our faith and our hope and our honour
      We pledge to our native soil!
 
RHYME a b c b *

     I charge you charge your glasses --
      I charge you drink with me
     To the men of the Four New Nations,
      And the Islands of the Sea --
     To the last least lump of coral
      That none may stand outside,
     And our own good pride shall teach us
      To praise our comrade's pride!
 
RHYME a b c b *

To the hush of the breathless morning
 On the thin, tin, crackling roofs,
To the haze of the burned back-ranges
 And the dust of the shoeless hoofs --
To the risk of a death by drowning,
 To the risk of a death by drouth --
To the men of a million acres,
 To the Sons of the Golden South!

RHYME a b c c b 
 
     To the Sons of the Golden South (Stand up!),
      And the life we live and know,
     Let a fellow sing o' the little things he cares about,
     If a fellow fights for the little things he cares about
      With the weight of a single blow!
 
RHYME a b c b *

To the smoke of a hundred coasters,
 To the sheep on a thousand hills,
To the sun that never blisters,
 To the rain that never chills --
To the land of the waiting spring-time,
 To our five-meal, meat-fed men,
To the tall, deep-bosomed women,
 And the children nine and ten!

RHYME a b c c b 

     And the children nine and ten (Stand up!),
      And the life we live and know,
     Let a fellow sing o' the little things he cares about,
     If a fellow fights for the little things he cares about
      With the weight of a two-fold blow!
 
RHYME a b c b *

To the far-flung fenceless prairie
 Where the quick cloud-shadows trail,
To our neighbour's barn in the offing
 And the line of the new-cut rail;
To the plough in her league-long furrow
 With the gray Lake gulls behind --
To the weight of a half-year's winter
 And the warm wet western wind!
 
RHYME a b c b *

To the home of the floods and thunder,
 To her pale dry healing blue --
To the lift of the great Cape combers,
 And the smell of the baked Karroo.
To the growl of the sluicing stamp-head --
 To the reef and the water-gold,
To the last and the largest Empire,
 To the map that is half unrolled!
 
RHYME a b c b *

To our dear dark foster-mothers,
 To the heathen songs they sung --
To the heathen speech we babbled
 Ere we came to the white man's tongue.
To the cool of our deep verandas --
 To the blaze of our jewelled main,
To the night, to the palms in the moonlight,
 And the fire-fly in the cane!
 
RHYME a b c b *

To the hearth of our people's people --
 To her well-ploughed windy sea,
To the hush of our dread high-altar
 Where The Abbey makes us We;
To the grist of the slow-ground ages,
 To the gain that is yours and mine --
To the Bank of the Open Credit,
 To the Power-house of the Line!
 
RHYME a b c b *

We've drunk to the Queen -- God bless her! --
 We've drunk to our mothers' land;
We've drunk to our English brother
 (And we hope he'll understand).
We've drunk as much as we're able,
 And the Cross swings low for the morn;
Last toast -- and your foot on the table! --
 A health to the Native-born!

RHYME a b c c b b a d e a

A health to the Nativeborn,
  We're six white men arow,
All bound to sing o' the Little things we care about,
All bound to fight for the Little things we care about
  With the weight of a six-fold blow!
By the might of our Cable-tow,
  From the Orkneys to the Horn
All round the world (and a Little loop to pull it by),
All round the world (and a Little strap to buckle it).
  A health to the Native-born!
 
TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 
 
"Farewell, Romance!" the Cave-men said;
 "With bone well carved he went away,
Flint arms the ignoble arrowhead,
 And jasper tips the spear to-day.
Changed are the Gods of Hunt and Dance,
And he with these.  Farewell, Romance!"
 
RHYME a b a b c c 
 
"Farewell, Romance!" the Lake-folk sighed;
 "We lift the weight of flatling years;
The caverns of the mountain-side
 Hold him who scorns our hutted piers.
Lost hills whereby we dare not dwell,
Guard ye his rest.  Romance, farewell!"
 
RHYME a b a b c c 
 
"Farewell, Romance!" the Soldier spoke;
 "By sleight of sword we may not win,
But scuffle 'mid uncleanly smoke
 Of arquebus and culverin.
Honour is lost, and none may tell
Who paid good blows.  Romance, farewell!"
 
RHYME a b a b c c 
 
"Farewell, Romance!" the Traders cried;
 Our keels ha' lain with every sea;
The dull-returning wind and tide
 Heave up the wharf where we would be;
The known and noted breezes swell
Our trudging sail.  Romance, farewell!"
 
RHYME a b a b c c 
 
"Good-bye, Romance!" the Skipper said;
 "He vanished with the coal we burn;
Our dial marks full steam ahead,
 Our speed is timed to half a turn.
Sure as the ferried barge we ply
'Twixt port and port.  Romance, good-bye!"
 
RHYME a b a b c c 
 
"Romance!" the season-tickets mourn,
 "~He~ never ran to catch his train,
But passed with coach and guard and horn --
 And left the local -- late again!"
Confound Romance! . . .  And all unseen
Romance brought up the nine-fifteen.
 
RHYME a b a b c c 
 
His hand was on the lever laid,
 His oil-can soothed the worrying cranks,
His whistle waked the snowbound grade,
 His fog-horn cut the reeking Banks;
By dock and deep and mine and mill
The Boy-god reckless laboured still!
 
RHYME a b a b c c 
 
Robed, crowned and throned, he wove his spell,
 Where heart-blood beat or hearth-smoke curled,
With unconsidered miracle,
 Hedged in a backward-gazing world;
Then taught his chosen bard to say:
"Our King was with us -- yesterday!"
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a *
 
Now this is the Law of the Muscovite, that he proves with shot and steel,
When ye come by his isles in the Smoky Sea ye must not take the seal,
Where the gray sea goes nakedly between the weed-hung shelves,
And the little blue fox he is bred for his skin and the seal they breed for themselves;
For when the ~matkas~ seek the shore to drop their pups aland,
The great man-seal haul out of the sea, a-roaring, band by band;
And when the first September gales have slaked their rutting-wrath,
The great man-seal haul back to the sea and no man knows their path.
Then dark they lie and stark they lie -- rookery, dune, and floe,
And the Northern Lights come down o' nights to dance with the houseless snow;
And God Who clears the grounding berg and steers the grinding floe,
He hears the cry of the little kit-fox and the wind along the snow.
But since our women must walk gay and money buys their gear,
The sealing-boats they filch that way at hazard year by year.
English they be and Japanee that hang on the Brown Bear's flank,
And some be Scot, but the worst of the lot, and the boldest thieves, be Yank!
 
RHYME a a *

It was the sealer ~Northern Light~, to the Smoky Seas she bore,
With a stovepipe stuck from a starboard port and the Russian flag at her fore.
(~Baltic~, ~Stralsund~, and ~Northern Light~ -- oh! they were birds of a feather --
Slipping away to the Smoky Seas, three seal-thieves together!)
And at last she came to a sandy cove and the Baltic lay therein,
But her men were up with the herding seal to drive and club and skin.
There were fifteen hundred skins abeach, cool pelt and proper fur,
When the ~Northern Light~ drove into the bight  and the sea-mist drove with her.
The ~Baltic~ called her men and weighed -- she could not choose but run --
For a stovepipe seen through the closing mist, it shows like a four-inch gun.

RHYME a a *
 
(And loss it is that is sad as death to lose both trip and ship
And lie for a rotting contraband on Vladivostock slip.)
She turned and dived in the sea-smother as a rabbit dives in the whins,
And the ~Northern Light~ sent up her boats to steal the stolen skins.
They had not brought a load to side or slid their hatches clear,
When they were aware of a sloop-of-war, ghost-white and very near.
Her flag she showed, and her guns she showed -- three of them, black, abeam,
And a funnel white with the crusted salt, but never a show of steam.
 
RHYME a a *
 
There was no time to man the brakes, they knocked the shackle free,
And the ~Northern Light~ stood out again, goose-winged to open sea.
(For life it is that is worse than death, by force of Russian law
To work in the mines of mercury that loose the teeth in your jaw.)
They had not run a mile from shore -- they heard no shots behind --
When the skipper smote his hand on his thigh and threw her up in the wind:
"Bluffed -- raised out on a bluff," said he, "for if my name's Tom Hall,
You must set a thief to catch a thief -- and a thief has caught us all!
By every butt in Oregon and every spar in Maine,
The hand that spilled the wind from her sail was the hand of Reuben Paine!
He has rigged and trigged her with paint and spar,  and, faith, he has faked her well --
But I'd know the ~Stralsund~'s deckhouse yet from here to the booms o' Hell.

RHYME a a *
 
Oh, once we ha' met at Baltimore, and twice on Boston pier,
But the sickest day for you, Reuben Paine, was the day that you came here --
The day that you came here, my lad, to scare us from our seal
With your funnel made o' your painted cloth, and your guns o' rotten deal!
Ring and blow for the ~Baltic~ now, and head her back to the bay,
And we'll come into the game again -- with a double deck to play!"
 
RHYME a a *
 
They rang and blew the sealers' call -- the poaching cry of the sea --
And they raised the ~Baltic~ out of the mist, and an angry ship was she:
And blind they groped through the whirling white and blind to the bay again,
Till they heard the creak of the ~Stralsund~'s boom  and the clank of her mooring chain.
They laid them down by bitt and boat, their pistols in their belts,
And:  "Will you fight for it, Reuben Paine, or will you share the pelts?"
 
RHYME a a *
 
A dog-toothed laugh laughed Reuben Paine, and bared his flenching-knife.
"Yea, skin for skin, and all that he hath a man will give for his life;
But I've six thousand skins below, and Yeddo Port to see,
And there's never a law of God or man runs north of Fifty-Three:
So go in peace to the naked seas with empty holds to fill,
And I'll be good to your seal this catch, as many as I shall kill!"
 
RHYME a a *
 
Answered the snap of a closing lock and the jar of a gun-butt slid,
But the tender fog shut fold on fold to hide the wrong they did.
The weeping fog rolled fold on fold the wrath of man to cloak,
And the flame-spurts pale ran down the rail as the sealing-rifles spoke.
The bullets bit on bend and butt, the splinter slivered free
(Little they trust to sparrow-dust that stop the seal in his sea!),
The thick smoke hung and would not shift, leaden it lay and blue,
But three were down on the ~Baltic~'s deck and two of the ~Stralsund~'s crew.
An arm's-length out and overside the banked fog held them bound,
But, as they heard or groan or word, they fired at the sound.

RHYME a a *
 
For one cried out on the Name of God, and one to have him cease,
And the questing volley found them both and bade them hold their peace;
And one called out on a heathen joss and one on the Virgin's Name,
And the schooling bullet leaped across and showed them whence they came.
And in the waiting silences the rudder whined beneath,
And each man drew his watchful breath slow taken 'tween the teeth --
Trigger and ear and eye acock, knit brow and hard-drawn lips --
Bracing his feet by chock and cleat for the rolling of the ships.
Till they heard the cough of a wounded man that fought in the fog for breath,
Till they heard the torment of Reuben Paine that wailed upon his death:
 
RHYME a a *
 
"The tides they'll go through Fundy Race but I'll go nevermore
And see the hogs from ebb-tide mark turn scampering back to shore.
No more I'll see the trawlers drift below the Bass Rock ground,
Or watch the tall Fall steamer lights tear blazing up the Sound.
Sorrow is me, in a lonely sea and a sinful fight I fall,
But if there's law o' God or man you'll swing for it yet, Tom Hall!"
Tom Hall stood up by the quarter-rail.  "Your words in your teeth," said he.
"There's never a law of God or man runs north of Fifty-Three.
So go in grace with Him to face, and an ill-spent life behind,
And I'll be good to your widows, Rube, as many as I shall find."
 
RHYME a a *
 
A ~Stralsund~ man shot blind and large, and a war-lock Finn was he,
And he hit Tom Hall with a bursting ball a hand's-breadth over the knee.
Tom Hall caught hold by the topping-lift, and sat him down with an oath,
"You'll wait a little, Rube," he said, "the Devil has called for both.
The Devil is driving both this tide, and the killing-grounds are close,
And we'll go up to the Wrath of God as the holluschickie goes.
O men, put back your guns again and lay your rifles by,
We've fought our fight, and the best are down.  Let up and let us die!

RHYME a a *
 
Quit firing, by the bow there -- quit!  Call off the ~Baltic~'s crew!
You're sure of Hell as me or Rube -- but wait till we get through."
There went no word between the ships, but thick and quick and loud
The life-blood drummed on the dripping decks,  with the fog-dew from the shroud,
The sea-pull drew them side by side, gunnel to gunnel laid,
And they felt the sheerstrakes pound and clear, but never a word was said.
 
RHYME a a *
 
Then Reuben Paine cried out again before his spirit passed:
"Have I followed the sea for thirty years to die in the dark at last?
Curse on her work that has nipped me here with a shifty trick unkind --
I have gotten my death where I got my bread, but I dare not face it blind.
Curse on the fog!  Is there never a wind of all the winds I knew
To clear the smother from off my chest, and let me look at the blue?"
The good fog heard -- like a splitten sail, to left and right she tore,
And they saw the sun-dogs in the haze and the seal upon the shore.

RHYME a a *
 
Silver and gray ran spit and bay to meet the steel-backed tide,
And pinched and white in the clearing light the crews stared overside.
O rainbow-gay the red pools lay that swilled and spilled and spread,
And gold, raw gold, the spent shell rolled between the careless dead --
The dead that rocked so drunkenwise to weather and to lee,
And they saw the work their hands had done as God had bade them see.
 
RHYME a a *
 
And a little breeze blew over the rail that made the headsails lift,
But no man stood by wheel or sheet, and they let the schooners drift.
And the rattle rose in Reuben's throat and he cast his soul with a cry,
And "Gone already?" Tom Hall he said.  "Then it's time for me to die."
His eyes were heavy with great sleep and yearning for the land,
And he spoke as a man that talks in dreams, his wound beneath his hand.
"Oh, there comes no good o' the westering wind that backs against the sun;
Wash down the decks -- they're all too red -- and share the skins and run,
~Baltic~, ~Stralsund~, and ~Northern Light~ -- clean share and share for all,
You'll find the fleets off Tolstoi Mees, but you will not find Tom Hall.
Evil he did in shoal-water and blacker sin on the deep,
But now he's sick of watch and trick and now he'll turn and sleep.

RHYME a a *
 
He'll have no more of the crawling sea that made him suffer so,
But he'll lie down on the killing-grounds where the holluschickie go.
And west you'll sail and south again, beyond the sea-fog's rim,
And tell the Yoshiwara girls to burn a stick for him.
And you'll not weight him by the heels and dump him overside,
But carry him up to the sand-hollows to die as Bering died,
And make a place for Reuben Paine that knows the fight was fair,
And leave the two that did the wrong to talk it over there!"
 
RHYME a a *
 
     Half-steam ahead by guess and lead, for the sun is mostly veiled --
     Through fog to fog, by luck and log, sail ye as Bering sailed;
     And if the light shall lift aright to give your landfall plain,
     North and by west, from Zapne Crest, ye raise the Crosses Twain.
     Fair marks are they to the inner bay, the reckless poacher knows
     What time the scarred see-catchie lead their sleek seraglios.

RHYME a a *
 
     Ever they hear the floe-pack clear, and the blast of the old bull-whale,
     And the deep seal-roar that beats off-shore above the loudest gale.
     Ever they wait the winter's hate as the thundering ~boorga~ calls,
     Where northward look they to St. George, and westward to St. Paul's.
     Ever they greet the hunted fleet -- lone keels off headlands drear --
     When the sealing-schooners flit that way at hazard year by year.

RHYME a b b a 

     Ever in Yokohama port men tell the tale anew
      Of a hidden sea and a hidden fight,
      When the ~Baltic~ ran from the ~Northern Light~
     And the ~Stralsund~ fought the two.
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
        I was the staunchest of our fleet
        Till the sea rose beneath our feet
     Unheralded, in hatred past all measure.
        Into his pits he stamped my crew,
        Buffeted, blinded, bound and threw,
     Bidding me eyeless wait upon his pleasure.
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   Man made me, and my will
   Is to my maker still,
Whom now the currents con, the rollers steer --
   Lifting forlorn to spy
   Trailed smoke along the sky,
Falling afraid lest any keel come near!
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   Wrenched as the lips of thirst,
   Wried, dried, and split and burst,
Bone-bleached my decks, wind-scoured to the graining;
   And jarred at every roll
   The gear that was my soul
Answers the anguish of my beams' complaining.
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   For life that crammed me full,
   Gangs of the prying gull
That shriek and scrabble on the riven hatches!
   For roar that dumbed the gale,
   My hawse-pipes guttering wail,
Sobbing my heart out through the uncounted watches!
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   Blind in the hot blue ring
   Through all my points I swing --
Swing and return to shift the sun anew.
   Blind in my well-known sky
   I hear the stars go by,
Mocking the prow that cannot hold one true!
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   White on my wasted path
   Wave after wave in wrath
Frets 'gainst his fellow, warring where to send me.
   Flung forward, heaved aside,
   Witless and dazed I bide
The mercy of the comber that shall end me.
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   North where the bergs careen,
   The spray of seas unseen
Smokes round my head and freezes in the falling;
   South where the corals breed,
   The footless, floating weed
Folds me and fouls me, strake on strake upcrawling.
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   I that was clean to run
   My race against the sun --
Strength on the deep, am bawd to all disaster --
   Whipped forth by night to meet
   My sister's careless feet,
And with a kiss betray her to my master!
 
RHYME a a b c c b  
 
   Man made me, and my will
   Is to my maker still --
To him and his, our peoples at their pier:
   Lifting in hope to spy
   Trailed smoke along the sky,
Falling afraid lest any keel come near!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a *  
 
A Rose, in tatters on the garden path,
Cried out to God and murmured 'gainst His Wrath,
Because a sudden wind at twilight's hush
Had snapped her stem alone of all the bush.
And God, Who hears both sun-dried dust and sun,
Had pity, whispering to that luckless one,
"Sister, in that thou sayest We did not well --
What voices heardst thou when thy petals fell?"
And the Rose answered, "In that evil hour
A voice said, `Father, wherefore falls the flower?
For lo, the very gossamers are still.'
And a voice answered, `Son, by Allah's will!'"
 
RHYME a a *  
 
Then softly as a rain-mist on the sward,
Came to the Rose the Answer of the Lord:
"Sister, before We smote the dark in twain,
Ere yet the stars saw one another plain,
Time, Tide, and Space, We bound unto the task
That thou shouldst fall, and such an one should ask."
Whereat the withered flower, all content,
Died as they die whose days are innocent;
While he who questioned why the flower fell
Caught hold of God and saved his soul from Hell.
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
You couldn't pack a Broadwood half a mile --
 You mustn't leave a fiddle in the damp --
You couldn't raft an organ up the Nile,
 And play it in an Equatorial swamp.
~I~ travel with the cooking-pots and pails --
 ~I'm~ sandwiched 'tween the coffee and the pork --
And when the dusty column checks and tails,
 You should hear me spur the rear-guard to a walk!
    With my "~Pilly-willy-winky-winky popp!~"
     [Oh, it's any tune that comes into my head!]
    So I keep 'em moving forward till they drop;
     So I play 'em up to water and to bed.
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
In the silence of the camp before the fight,
 When it's good to make your will and say your prayer,
You can hear my ~strumpty-tumpty~ overnight
 Explaining ten to one was always fair.
I'm the Prophet of the Utterly Absurd,
 Of the Patently Impossible and Vain --
And when the Thing that Couldn't has occurred,
 Give me time to change my leg and go again.
    With my "~Tumpa-tumpa-tumpa-tum-pa tump!~"
     In the desert where the dung-fed camp-smoke curled
    There was never voice before us till I led our lonely chorus,
     I -- the war-drum of the White Man round the world!
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
By the bitter road the Younger Son must tread,
 Ere he win to hearth and saddle of his own, --
'Mid the riot of the shearers at the shed,
 In the silence of the herder's hut alone --
In the twilight, on a bucket upside down,
 Hear me babble what the weakest won't confess --
I am Memory and Torment -- I am Town!
 I am all that ever went with evening dress!
    With my "~Tunk-a tunka-tunka-tunka-tunk!~"
     [So the lights -- the London Lights -- grow near and plain!]
    So I rowel 'em afresh towards the Devil and the Flesh,
     Till I bring my broken rankers home again.
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
In desire of many marvels over sea,
 Where the new-raised tropic city sweats and roars,
I have sailed with Young Ulysses from the quay
 Till the anchor rumbled down on stranger shores.
He is blooded to the open and the sky,
 He is taken in a snare that shall not fail,
He shall hear me singing strongly, till he die,
 Like the shouting of a backstay in a gale.
    With my "~Hya!  Heeya!  Heeya!  Hullah!  Haul!~"
     [O the green that thunders aft along the deck!]
    Are you sick o' towns and men?  You must sign and sail again,
     For it's "Johnny Bowlegs, pack your kit and trek!"
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
Through the gorge that gives the stars at noon-day clear --
 Up the pass that packs the scud beneath our wheel --
Round the bluff that sinks her thousand fathom sheer --
 Down the valley with our guttering brakes asqueal:
Where the trestle groans and quivers in the snow,
 Where the many-shedded levels loop and twine,
So I lead my reckless children from below
 Till we sing the Song of Roland to the pine.
    With my "~Tinka-tinka-tinka-tinka-tink!~"
     [And the axe has cleared the mountain, croup and crest!]
    So we ride the iron stallions down to drink,
     Through the ca]~nons to the waters of the West!
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
And the tunes that mean so much to you alone --
 Common tunes that make you choke and blow your nose,
Vulgar tunes that bring the laugh that brings the groan --
 I can rip your very heartstrings out with those;
With the feasting, and the folly, and the fun --
 And the lying, and the lusting, and the drink,
And the merry play that drops you, when you're done,
 To the thoughts that burn like irons if you think.
    With my "~Plunka-lunka-lunka-lunka-lunk!~"
     Here's a trifle on account of pleasure past,
    Ere the wit that made you win gives you eyes to see your sin
     And the heavier repentance at the last!
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
Let the organ moan her sorrow to the roof --
 I have told the naked stars the Grief of Man!
Let the trumpets snare the foeman to the proof --
 I have known Defeat, and mocked it as we ran!
My bray ye may not alter nor mistake
 When I stand to jeer the fatted Soul of Things,
But the Song of Lost Endeavour that I make,
 Is it hidden in the twanging of the strings?
    With my "~Ta-ra-rara-rara-ra-ra-rrrp!~"
     [Is it naught to you that hear and pass me by?]
    But the word -- the word is mine, when the order moves the line
     And the lean, locked ranks go roaring down to die.
 
RHYME a b a b *  
 
Of the driven dust of speech I make a flame
 And a scourge of broken withes that men let fall:
For the words that had no honour till I came --
 Lo! I raise them into honour over all!
By the wisdom of the centuries I speak --
 To the tune of yestermorn I set the truth --
I, the joy of life unquestioned -- I, the Greek --
 I, the everlasting Wonder Song of Youth!
    With my "~Tinka-tinka-tinka-tinka-tink!~"
     [What d'ye lack, my noble masters?  What d'ye lack?]
    So I draw the world together link by link:
     Yea, from Delos up to Limerick and back!
 
TITLE

RHYME a a *
 
The Liner she's a lady, an' she never looks nor heeds --
The Man-o'-War's her husband, an' he gives her all she needs;
But, oh, the little cargo-boats, that sail the wet seas roun',
They're just the same as you an' me a-plyin' up an' down!
 
RHYME a a *
 
     Plyin' up an' down, Jenny, hangin' round the Yard,
     All the way by Fratton tram down to Portsmouth HArd;
     Anythin' for business, an' we're growin' old --
     Plyin' up an' down, Jenny, waitin' in the cold!
 
RHYME a a *
 
The Liner she's a lady by the paint upon her face,
An' if she meets an accident they count it sore disgrace:
The Man-o'-War's her husband, and he's always handy by,
But, oh, the little cargo-boats! they've got to load or die.
 
RHYME a a *
 
The Liner she's a lady, and her route is cut an' dried;
The Man-o'-War's her husband, an' he always keeps beside;
But, oh, the little cargo-boats that haven't any man,
They've got to do their business first, and make the most they can!
 
RHYME a a *
 
The Liner she's a lady, and if a war should come,
The Man-o'-War's her husband, and he'd bid her stay at home;
But, oh, the little cargo-boats that fill with every tide!
HE'd have to up an' fight for them, for they are England's pride.
 
RHYME a a *
 
The Liner she's a lady, but if she wasn't made,
There still would be the cargo-boats for home an' foreign trade.
The Man-o'-War's her husband, but if we wasn't here,
HE wouldn't have to fight at all for home an' friends so dear.
 
RHYME a a *
 
     HOme an' friends so dear, Jenny, hangin' round the Yard,
     All the way by Fratton tram down to Portsmouth HArd;
     Anythin' for business, an' we're growin' old --
     HOme an' friends so dear, Jenny, waitin' in the cold!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a a 
 
The fear was on the cattle, for the gale was on the sea,
An' the pens broke up on the lower deck an' let the creatures free --
An' the lights went out on the lower deck, an' no one near but me.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
I had been singin' to them to keep 'em quiet there,
For the lower deck is the dangerousest, requirin' constant care,
An' give to me as the strongest man, though used to drink and swear.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
I see my chance was certain of bein' horned or trod,
For the lower deck was packed with steers thicker'n peas in a pod,
An' more pens broke at every roll -- so I made a Contract with God.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
An' by the terms of the Contract, as I have read the same,
If He got me to port alive I would exalt His Name,
An' praise His Holy Majesty till further orders came.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
He saved me from the cattle an' He saved me from the sea,
For they found me 'tween two drownded ones where the roll had landed me --
An' a four-inch crack on top of my head, as crazy as could be.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
But that were done by a stanchion, an' not by a bullock at all,
An' I lay still for seven weeks convalessing of the fall,
An' readin' the shiny Scripture texts in the Seaman's Hospital.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
An' I spoke to God of our Contract, an' He says to my prayer:
"I never puts on My ministers no more than they can bear.
So back you go to the cattle-boats an' preach My Gospel there.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
"For human life is chancy at any kind of trade,
But most of all, as well you know, when the steers are mad-afraid;
So you go back to the cattle-boats an' preach 'em as I've said.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
"They must quit drinkin' an' swearin', they mustn't knife on a blow,
They must quit gamblin' their wages, and you must preach it so;
For now those boats are more like Hell than anything else I know."
 
RHYME a a a 
 
I didn't want to do it, for I knew what I should get,
An' I wanted to preach Religion, handsome an' out of the wet,
But the Word of the Lord were lain on me, an' I done what I was set.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
I have been smit an' bruised, as warned would be the case,
An' turned my cheek to the smiter exactly as Scripture says;
But following that, I knocked him down an' led him up to Grace.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
An' we have preaching on Sundays whenever the sea is calm,
An' I use no knife or pistol an' I never take no harm,
For the Lord abideth back of me to guide my fighting arm.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
An' I sign for four-pound-ten a month and save the money clear,
An' I am in charge of the lower deck, an' I never lose a steer;
An' I believe in Almighty God an' preach His Gospel here.
 
RHYME a a a 
 
The skippers say I'm crazy, but I can prove 'em wrong,
For I am in charge of the lower deck with all that doth belong --
~Which they would not give to a lunatic, and the competition so strong!~
  
TITLE
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
There dwells a wife by the Northern Gate,
 And a wealthy wife is she;
She breeds a breed o' rovin' men
 And casts them over sea.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
And some are drowned in deep water,
 And some in sight o' shore,
And word goes back to the weary wife
 And ever she sends more.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
For since that wife had gate or gear,
 Or hearth or garth or bield,
She willed her sons to the white harvest,
 And that is a bitter yield.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
She wills her sons to the wet ploughing,
 To ride the horse of tree,
And syne her sons come back again
 Far-spent from out the sea.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
The good wife's sons come home again
 With little into their hands,
But the lore of men that ha' dealt with men
 In the new and naked lands;
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
But the faith of men that ha' brothered men
 By more than easy breath,
And the eyes o' men that ha' read wi' men
 In the open books of death.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
Rich are they, rich in wonders seen,
 But poor in the goods o' men;
So what they ha' got by the skin o' their teeth
 They sell for their teeth again.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
For whether they lose to the naked life
 Or win to their hearts' desire,
They tell it all to the weary wife
 That nods beside the fire.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
Her hearth is wide to every wind
 That makes the white ash spin;
And tide and tide and 'tween the tides
 Her sons go out and in;
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
(Out with great mirth that do desire
 Hazard of trackless ways,
In with content to wait their watch
 And warm before the blaze);
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
And some return by failing light,
 And some in waking dream,
For she hears the heels of the dripping ghosts
 That ride the rough roof-beam.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
Home, they come home from all the ports,
 The living and the dead;
The good wife's sons come home again
 For her blessing on their head!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c b *  
 
The earth is full of anger,
 The seas are dark with wrath,
The Nations in their harness
 Go up against our path:
Ere yet we loose the legions --
 Ere yet we draw the blade,
Jehovah of the Thunders,
 Lord God of Battles, aid!
 
RHYME a b c b *  
 
High lust and froward bearing,
 Proud heart, rebellious brow --
Deaf ear and soul uncaring,
 We seek Thy mercy now!
The sinner that forswore Thee,
 The fool that passed Thee by,
Our times are known before Thee --
 Lord, grant us strength to die!
 
RHYME a b c b *  
 
For those who kneel beside us
 At altars not Thine own,
Who lack the lights that guide us,
 Lord, let their faith atone.
If wrong we did to call them,
 By honour bound they came;
Let not Thy Wrath befall them,
 But deal to us the blame.
 
RHYME a b c b *  
 
From panic, pride, and terror,
 Revenge that knows no rein,
Light haste and lawless error,
 Protect us yet again.
Cloak Thou our undeserving,
 Make firm the shuddering breath,
In silence and unswerving
 To taste Thy lesser death!
 
RHYME a b c b *  
 
Ah, Mary pierced with sorrow,
 Remember, reach and save
The soul that comes to-morrow
 Before the God that gave!
Since each was born of woman,
 For each at utter need --
True comrade and true foeman --
 Madonna, intercede!
 
RHYME a b c b *  
 
E'en now their vanguard gathers,
 E'en now we face the fray --
As Thou didst help our fathers,
 Help Thou our host to-day!
Fulfilled of signs and wonders,
 In life, in death made clear --
Jehovah of the Thunders,
 Lord God of Battles, hear!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
     Thy face is far from this our war,
      Our call and counter-cry,
     I shall not find Thee quick and kind,
      Nor know Thee till I die,
     Enough for me in dreams to see
      And touch Thy garments' hem:
     Thy feet have trod so near to God
      I may not follow them.
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
Through wantonness if men profess
 They weary of Thy parts,
E'en let them die at blasphemy
 And perish with their arts;
But we that love, but we that prove
 Thine excellence august,
While we adore discover more
 Thee perfect, wise, and just.
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
Since spoken word Man's Spirit stirred
 Beyond his belly-need,
What is is Thine of fair design
 In thought and craft and deed;
Each stroke aright of toil and fight,
 That was and that shall be,
And hope too high, wherefore we die,
 Has birth and worth in Thee.
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
Who holds by Thee hath Heaven in fee
 To gild his dross thereby,
And knowledge sure that he endure
 A child until he die --
For to make plain that man's disdain
 Is but new Beauty's birth --
For to possess in loneliness
 The joy of all the earth.
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
As Thou didst teach all lovers speech
 And Life all mystery,
So shalt Thou rule by every school
 Till love and longing die,
Who wast or yet the Lights were set,
 A whisper in the Void,
Who shalt be sung through planets young
 When this is clean destroyed.
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
Beyond the bounds our staring rounds,
 Across the pressing dark,
The children wise of outer skies
 Look hitherward and mark
A light that shifts, a glare that drifts,
 Rekindling thus and thus,
Not all forlorn, for Thou hast borne
 Strange tales to them of us.
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
Time hath no tide but must abide
 The servant of Thy will;
Tide hath no time, for to Thy rhyme
 The ranging stars stand still --
Regent of spheres that lock our fears,
 Our hopes invisible,
Oh 'twas certes at Thy decrees
 We fashioned Heaven and Hell!
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
Pure Wisdom hath no certain path
 That lacks thy morning-eyne,
And captains bold by Thee controlled
 Most like to Gods design;
Thou art the Voice to kingly boys
 To lift them through the fight,
And Comfortress of Unsuccess,
 To give the dead good-night --
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
A veil to draw 'twixt God His Law
 And Man's infirmity,
A shadow kind to dumb and blind
 The shambles where we die;
A rule to trick th' arithmetic
 Too base of leaguing odds --
The spur of trust, the curb of lust,
 Thou handmaid of the Gods!
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
O Charity, all patiently
 Abiding wrack and scaith!
O Faith, that meets ten thousand cheats
 Yet drops no jot of faith!
Devil and brute Thou dost transmute
 To higher, lordlier show,
Who art in sooth that lovely Truth
 The careless angels know!
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
     Thy face is far from this our war,
      Our call and counter-cry,
     I may not find Thee quick and kind,
      Nor know Thee till I die.
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
     Yet may I look with heart unshook
      On blow brought home or missed --
     Yet may I hear with equal ear
      The clarions down the List;
     Yet set my lance above mischance
      And ride the barriere --
     Oh, hit or miss, how little 'tis,
      My Lady is not there!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
          Buy my English posies!
           Kent and Surrey may --
          Violets of the Undercliff
           Wet with Channel spray;
          Cowslips from a Devon combe --
           Midland furze afire --
          Buy my English posies
           And I'll sell your heart's desire!
 
RHYME a b c b * 
 
    Buy my English posies!
     You that scorn the May,
    Won't you greet a friend from home
     Half the world away?
    Green against the draggled drift,
     Faint and frail and first --
    Buy my Northern blood-root
     And I'll know where you were nursed:

TITLE
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
The King has called for priest and cup,
 The King has taken spur and blade
To dub True Thomas a belted knight,
 And all for the sake o' the songs he made.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
They have sought him high, they have sought him low,
 They have sought him over down and lea;
They have found him by the milk-white thorn
 That guards the gates o' Faerie.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
     'Twas bent beneath and blue above,
      Their eyes were held that they might not see
     The kine that grazed beneath the knowes,
      Oh, they were the Queens o' Faerie!
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Now cease your song," the King he said,
 "Oh, cease your song and get you dight
To vow your vow and watch your arms,
 For I will dub you a belted knight.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"For I will give you a horse o' pride,
 Wi' blazon and spur and page and squire;
Wi' keep and tail and seizin and law,
 And land to hold at your desire."
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
True Thomas smiled above his harp,
 And turned his face to the naked sky,
Where, blown before the wastrel wind,
 The thistle-down she floated by.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"I ha' vowed my vow in another place,
 And bitter oath it was on me,
I ha' watched my arms the lee-long night,
 Where five-score fighting men would flee.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"My lance is tipped o' the hammered flame,
 My shield is beat o' the moonlight cold;
And I won my spurs in the Middle World,
 A thousand fathom beneath the mould.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"And what should I make wi' a horse o' pride,
 And what should I make wi' a sword so brown,
But spill the rings o' the Gentle Folk
 And flyte my kin in the Fairy Town?
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"And what should I make wi' blazon and belt,
 Wi' keep and tail and seizin and fee,
And what should I do wi' page and squire
 That am a king in my own countrie?
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"For I send east and I send west,
 And I send far as my will may flee,
By dawn and dusk and the drinking rain,
 And syne my Sendings return to me.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"They come wi' news of the groanin' earth,
 They come wi' news o' the roarin' sea,
Wi' word of Spirit and Ghost and Flesh,
 And man, that's mazed among the three."
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
The King he bit his nether lip,
 And smote his hand upon his knee:
"By the faith o' my soul, True Thomas," he said,
 "Ye waste no wit in courtesie!
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"As I desire, unto my pride,
 Can I make Earls by three and three,
To run before and ride behind
 And serve the sons o' my body."
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"And what care I for your row-foot earls,
 Or all the sons o' your body?
Before they win to the Pride o' Name,
 I trow they all ask leave o' me.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"For I make Honour wi' muckle mouth,
 As I make Shame wi' mincin' feet,
To sing wi' the priests at the market-cross,
 Or run wi' the dogs in the naked street.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"And some they give me the good red gold,
 And some they give me the white money,
And some they give me a clout o' meal,
 For they be people o' low degree.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"And the song I sing for the counted gold
 The same I sing for the white money,
But best I sing for the clout o' meal
 That simple people given me."
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
The King cast down a silver groat,
 A silver groat o' Scots money,
"If I come wi' a poor man's dole," he said,
 "True Thomas, will ye harp to me?"
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Whenas I harp to the children small,
 They press me close on either hand.
And who are you," True Thomas said,
 "That you should ride while they must stand?
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Light down, light down from your horse o' pride,
 I trow ye talk too loud and hie,
And I will make you a triple word,
 And syne, if ye dare, ye shall 'noble me."
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
He has lighted down from his horse o' pride,
 And set his back against the stone.
"Now guard you well," True Thomas said,
 "Ere I rax your heart from your breast-bone!"
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
True Thomas played upon his harp,
 The fairy harp that couldna lee,
And the first least word the proud King heard,
 It harpit the salt tear out o' his ee.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Oh, I see the love that I lost long syne,
 I touch the hope that I may not see,
And all that I did o' hidden shame,
 Like little snakes they hiss at me.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"The sun is lost at noon -- at noon!
 The dread o' doom has grippit me.
True Thomas, hide me under your cloak,
 God wot, I'm little fit to dee!"
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
     'Twas bent beneath and blue above --
      'Twas open field and running flood --
     Where, hot on heath and dike and wall,
      The high sun warmed the adder's brood.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Lie down, lie down," True Thomas said.
 "The God shall judge when all is done.
But I will bring you a better word
 And lift the cloud that I laid on."
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
True Thomas played upon his harp,
 That birled and brattled to his hand,
And the next least word True Thomas made,
 It garred the King take horse and brand.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Oh, I hear the tread o' the fighting men,
 I see the sun on splent and spear.
I mark the arrow outen the fern
 That flies so low and sings so clear!
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Advance my standards to that war,
 And bid my good knights prick and ride;
The gled shall watch as fierce a fight
 As e'er was fought on the Border side!"
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
     'Twas bent beneath and blue above,
      'Twas nodding grass and naked sky,
     Where, ringing up the wastrel wind,
      The eyas stooped upon the pie.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
True Thomas sighed above his harp,
 And turned the song on the midmost string;
And the last least word True Thomas made,
 He harpit his dead youth back to the King.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Now I am prince, and I do well
 To love my love withouten fear;
To walk wi' man in fellowship,
 And breathe my horse behind the deer.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"My hounds they bay unto the death,
 The buck has couched beyond the burn,
My love she waits at her window
 To wash my hands when I return.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"For that I live am I content
 (Oh! I have seen my true love's eyes)
To stand wi' Adam in Eden-glade,
 And run in the woods o' Paradise!"
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
     'Twas naked sky and nodding grass,
      'Twas running flood and wastrel wind,
     Where, checked against the open pass,
      The red deer belled to call the hind.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
True Thomas laid his harp away,
 And louted low at the saddle-side;
He has taken stirrup and hauden rein,
 And set the King on his horse o' pride.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"Sleep ye or wake," True Thomas said,
 "That sit so still, that muse so long;
Sleep ye or wake? -- till the latter sleep
 I trow ye'll not forget my song.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"I ha' harpit a shadow out o' the sun
 To stand before your face and cry;
I ha' armed the earth beneath your heel,
 And over your head I ha' dusked the sky.
 
RHYME a b c b 
 
"I ha' harpit ye up to the throne o' God,
 I ha' harpit your midmost soul in three;
I ha' harpit ye down to the Hinges o' Hell,
 And -- ye -- would -- make -- a Knight o' me!"
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
In the Neolithic Age savage warfare did I wage
 For food and fame and woolly horses' pelt;
I was singer to my clan in that dim, red Dawn of Man,
 And I sang of all we fought and feared and felt.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Yea, I sang as now I sing, when the Prehistoric spring
 Made the piled Biscayan ice-pack split and shove;
And the troll and gnome and dwerg, and the Gods of Cliff and Berg
 Were about me and beneath me and above.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
But a rival, of Solutr]/e, told the tribe my style was ~outr]/e~ --
 'Neath a tomahawk of diorite he fell.
And I left my views on Art, barbed and tanged, below the heart
 Of a mammothistic etcher at Grenelle.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Then I stripped them, scalp from skull, and my hunting dogs fed full,
 And their teeth I threaded neatly on a thong;
And I wiped my mouth and said, "It is well that they are dead,
 For I know my work is right and theirs was wrong."
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
But my Totem saw the shame; from his ridgepole shrine he came,
 And he told me in a vision of the night: --
"There are nine and sixty ways of constructing tribal lays,
 And every single one of them is right!"
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Then the silence closed upon me till They put new clothing on me
 Of whiter, weaker flesh and bone more frail;
And I stepped beneath Time's finger, once again a tribal singer
 [And a minor poet certified by Tr--ll].
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Still they skirmish to and fro, men my messmates on the snow,
 When we headed off the aurochs turn for turn;
When the rich Allobrogenses never kept amanuenses,
 And our only plots were piled in lakes at Berne.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Still a cultured Christian age sees us scuffle, squeak, and rage,
 Still we pinch and slap and jabber, scratch and dirk;
Still we let our business slide -- as we dropped the half-dressed hide --
 To show a fellow-savage how to work.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Still the world is wondrous large, -- seven seas from marge to marge, --
 And it holds a vast of various kinds of man;
And the wildest dreams of Kew are the facts of Khatmandhu,
 And the crimes of Clapham chaste in Martaban.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
Here's my wisdom for your use, as I learned it when the moose
 And the reindeer roared where Paris roars to-night: --
There are nine and sixty ways of constructing tribal lays,
 And -- every -- single -- one -- of -- them -- is -- right!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Once, on a glittering ice-field, ages and ages ago,
Ung, a maker of pictures, fashioned an image of snow.
Fashioned the form of a tribesman -- gaily he whistled and sung,
Working the snow with his fingers.  ~Read ye the Story of Ung!~
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Pleased was his tribe with that image -- came in their hundreds to scan --
Handled it, smelt it, and grunted:  "Verily, this is a man!
Thus do we carry our lances -- thus is a war-belt slung.
Lo! it is even as we are.  Glory and honour to Ung!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Later he pictured an aurochs -- later he pictured a bear --
Pictured the sabre-tooth tiger dragging a man to his lair --
Pictured the mountainous mammoth, hairy, abhorrent, alone --
Out of the love that he bore them, scribing them clearly on bone.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Swift came the tribe to behold them, peering and pushing and still --
Men of the berg-battered beaches, men of the boulder-hatched hill --
Hunters and fishers and trappers, presently whispering low:
"Yea, they are like -- and it may be --  But how does the Picture-man know?"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"Ung -- hath he slept with the Aurochs -- watched where the Mastodon roam?
Spoke on the ice with the Bow-head -- followed the Sabre-tooth home?
Nay!  These are toys of his fancy!  If he have cheated us so,
How is there truth in his image -- the man that he fashioned of snow?"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Wroth was that maker of pictures -- hotly he answered the call:
"Hunters and fishers and trappers, children and fools are ye all!
Look at the beasts when ye hunt them!"  Swift from the tumult he broke,
Ran to the cave of his father and told him the shame that they spoke.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And the father of Ung gave answer, that was old and wise in the craft,
Maker of pictures aforetime, he leaned on his lance and laughed:
"If they could see as thou seest they would do what thou hast done,
And each man would make him a picture, and -- what would become of my son?
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"There would be no pelts of the reindeer, flung down at thy cave for a gift,
Nor dole of the oily timber that comes on the Baltic drift;
No store of well-drilled needles, nor ouches of amber pale;
No new-cut tongues of the bison, nor meat of the stranded whale.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"~Thou~ hast not toiled at the fishing when the sodden trammels freeze,
Nor worked the war-boats outward through the rush of the rock-staked seas,
Yet they bring thee fish and plunder -- full meal and an easy bed --
And all for the sake of thy pictures."  And Ung held down his head.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"~Thou~ hast not stood to the Aurochs when the red snow reeks of the fight;
Men have no time at the houghing to count his curls aright.
And the heart of the hairy Mammoth, thou sayest, they do not see,
Yet they save it whole from the beaches and broil the best for thee.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
"And now do they press to thy pictures, with opened mouth and eye,
And a little gift in the doorway, and the praise no gift can buy:
But -- sure they have doubted thy pictures, and that is a grievous stain --
Son that can see so clearly, return them their gifts again!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And Ung looked down at his deerskins -- their broad shell-tasselled bands --
And Ung drew downward his mitten and looked at his naked hands;
And he gloved himself and departed, and he heard his father, behind:
"Son that can see so clearly, rejoice that thy tribe is blind!"
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Straight on the glittering ice-field, by the caves of the lost Dordogne,
Ung, a maker of pictures, fell to his scribing on bone
Even to mammoth editions.  Gaily he whistled and sung,
Blessing his tribe for their blindness.  ~Heed ye the Story of Ung!~
 
TITLE

RHYME a a * 
  
Full thirty foot she towered from waterline to rail.
It cost a watch to steer her, and a week to shorten sail;
But, spite all modern notions, I found her first and best --
The only certain packet for the Islands of the Blest.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Fair held the breeze behind us -- 'twas warm with lovers' prayers.
We'd stolen wills for ballast and a crew of missing heirs.
They shipped as Able Bastards till the Wicked Nurse confessed,
And they worked the old three-decker to the Islands of the Blest.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
By ways no gaze could follow, a course unspoiled of Cook,
Per Fancy, fleetest in man, our titled berths we took
With maids of matchless beauty and parentage unguessed,
And a Church of England parson for the Islands of the Blest.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
We asked no social questions -- we pumped no hidden shame --
We never talked obstetrics when the Little Stranger came:
We left the Lord in Heaven, we left the fiends in Hell.
We weren't exactly Yussufs, but -- Zuleika didn't tell.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
No moral doubt assailed us, so when the port we neared,
The villain had his flogging at the gangway, and we cheered.
'Twas fiddle in the forc's'le -- 'twas garlands on the mast,
For every one got married, and I went ashore at last.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
I left 'em all in couples a-kissing on the decks.
I left the lovers loving and the parents signing cheques.
In endless English comfort by county-folk caressed,
I left the old three-decker at the Islands of the Blest!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
That route is barred to steamers:  you'll never lift again
Our purple-painted headlands or the lordly keeps of Spain.
They're just beyond your skyline, howe'er so far you cruise
In a ram-you-damn-you liner with a brace of bucking screws.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Swing round your aching search-light -- 'twill show no haven's peace.
Ay, blow your shrieking sirens to the deaf, gray-bearded seas!
Boom out the dripping oil-bags to skin the deep's unrest --
And you aren't one knot the nearer to the Islands of the Blest!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
But when you're threshing, crippled, with broken bridge and rail,
At a drogue of dead convictions to hold you head to gale,
Calm as the Flying Dutchman, from truck to taffrail dressed,
You'll see the old three-decker for the Islands of the Blest.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
You'll see her tiering canvas in sheeted silver spread;
You'll hear the long-drawn thunder 'neath her leaping figure-head;
While far, so far above you, her tall poop-lanterns shine
Unvexed by wind or weather like the candles round a shrine!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Hull down -- hull down and under -- she dwindles to a speck,
With noise of pleasant music and dancing on her deck.
All's well -- all's well aboard her -- she's left you far behind,
With a scent of old-world roses through the fog that ties you blind.
 
RHYME a a * 
 
Her crew are babes or madmen?  Her port is all to make?
You're manned by Truth and Science, and you steam for steaming's sake?
Well, tinker up your engines -- you know your business best --
~She~'s taking tired people to the Islands of the Blest!
 
TITLE 
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
"If the Led Striker call it a strike,
 Or the papers call it a war,
They know not much what I am like,
 Nor what he is, my Avatar."
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Through many roads, by me possessed,
 He shambles forth in cosmic guise;
He is the Jester and the Jest,
 And he the Text himself applies.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
The Celt is in his heart and hand,
 The Gaul is in his brain and nerve;
Where, cosmopolitanly planned,
 He guards the Redskin's dry reserve.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
His easy unswept hearth he lends
 From Labrador to Guadeloupe;
Till, elbowed out by sloven friends,
 He camps, at sufferance, on the stoop.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Calm-eyed he scoffs at sword and crown,
 Or panic-blinded stabs and slays:
Blatant he bids the world bow down,
 Or cringing begs a crust of praise;
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Or, sombre-drunk, at mine and mart,
 He dubs his dreary brethren Kings.
His hands are black with blood -- his heart
 Leaps, as a babe's, at little things.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
But, through the shift of mood and mood,
 Mine ancient humour saves him whole --
The cynic devil in his blood
 That bids him mock his hurrying soul;
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
That bids him flout the Law he makes,
 That bids him make the Law he flouts,
Till, dazed by many doubts, he wakes
 The drumming guns that -- have no doubts;
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
That checks him foolish -- hot and fond,
 That chuckles through his deepest ire,
That gilds the slough of his despond
 But dims the goal of his desire;
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Inopportune, shrill-accented,
 The acrid Asiatic mirth
That leaves him, careless 'mid his dead,
 The scandal of the elder earth.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
How shall he clear himself, how reach
 Your bar or weighed defence prefer?
A brother hedged with alien speech
 And lacking all interpreter.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Which knowledge vexes him a space;
 But while Reproof around him rings,
He turns a keen untroubled face
 Home, to the instant need of things.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Enslaved, illogical, elate,
 He greets th' embarrassed Gods, nor fears
To shake the iron hand of Fate
 Or match with Destiny for beers.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
Lo, imperturbable he rules,
 Unkempt, disreputable, vast --
And, in the teeth of all the schools,
 I -- I shall save him at the last!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a a *
 
I've paid for your sickest fancies; I've humoured your crackedest whim --
Dick, it's your daddy, dying; you've got to listen to him!
Good for a fortnight, am I?  The doctor told you?  He lied.
I shall go under by morning, and --  Put that nurse outside.
'Never seen death yet, Dickie?  Well, now is your time to learn,
And you'll wish you held my record before it comes to your turn.
Not counting the Line and the Foundry, the yards and the village, too,
I've made myself and a million; but I'm damned if I made you.
Master at two-and-twenty, and married at twenty-three --
Ten thousand men on the pay-roll, and forty freighters at sea!
Fifty years between 'em, and every year of it fight,
And now I'm Sir Anthony Gloster, dying, a baronite:
For I lunched with his Royal HIghness -- what was it the papers a-had?
"Not least of our merchant-princes."  Dickie, that's me, your dad!
~I~ didn't begin with askings.  ~I~ took my job and I stuck;
And I took the chances they wouldn't, an' now they're calling it luck.
Lord, what boats I've handled -- rotten and leaky and old!
Ran 'em, or -- opened the bilge-cock, precisely as I was told.

RHYME a a *
 
Grub that hud bind you crazy, and crews that hud turn you grey,
And a big fat lump of insurance to cover the risk on the way.
The others they dursn't do it; they said they valued their life
(They've served me since as skippers).  ~I~ went, and I took my wife.
Over the world I drove 'em, married at twenty-three,
And your mother saving the money and making a man of me.
~I~ was content to be master, but she said there was better behind;
She took the chances I wouldn't, and I followed your mother blind.
She egged me to borrow the money, an' she helped me to clear the loan,
When we bought half shares in a cheap hun and hoisted a flag of our own.
Patching and coaling on credit, and living the Lord knew how,
We started the Red Ox freighters -- we've eight-and-thirty now.

RHYME a a *
 
And those were the days of clippers, and the freights were clipper-freights,
And we knew we were making our fortune, but she died in Macassar Straits --
By the Little Paternosters, as you come to the Union Bank --
And we dropped her in fourteen fathom; I pricked it off where she sank.
Owners we were, full owners, and the boat was christened for her,
And she died in the ~Mary Gloster~.  My heart, how young we were!
So I went on a spree round Java and well-nigh ran her ashore,
But your mother came and warned me and I wouldn't liquor no more:
Strict I stuck to my business, afraid to stop or I'd think,
Saving the money (she warned me), and letting the other men drink.
And I met M'Cullough in London (I'd turned five hundred then),
And 'tween us we started the Foundry -- three forges and twenty men:
Cheap repairs for the cheap huns.  It paid, and the business grew,
For I bought me a steam-lathe patent, and that was a gold mine too.
"Cheaper to build 'em than buy 'em," ~I~ said, but M'Cullough he shied,
And we wasted a year in talking before we moved to the Clyde.

RHYME a a *
 
And the Lines were all beginning, and we all of us started fair,
Building our engines like houses and staying the boilers square.
But M'Cullough he wanted cabins with marble and maple and all,
And Brussels an' Utrecht velvet, and baths and a Social Hall,
And pipes for closets all over, and cutting the frames too light,
But M'Cullough he died in the Sixties, and --  Well, I'm dying to-night. . . .
I knew -- ~I~ knew what was coming, when we bid on the ~Byfleet~'s keel --
They piddled and piffled with iron:  I'd given my orders for steel!
Steel and the first expansions.  It paid, I tell you, it paid,
When we came with our nine-knot freighters and collared the long-run trade!
And they asked me how I did it, and I gave 'em the Scripture text,
"You keep your light so shining a little in front o' the next!"
They copied all they could follow, but they couldn't copy my mind,
And I left 'em sweating and stealing a year and a half behind.

RHYME a a *
 
Then came the armour-contracts, but that was M'Cullough's side;
He was always best in the Foundry, but better, perhaps, he died.
I went through his private papers; the notes was plainer than print;
And I'm no fool to finish if a man'll give me a hint.
(I remember his widow was angry.)  So I saw what the drawings meant,
And I started the six-inch rollers, and it paid me sixty per cent --
Sixty per cent ~with~ failures, and more than twice we could do,
And a quarter-million to credit, and I saved it all for you!
I thought -- it doesn't matter -- you seemed to favour your ma,
But you're nearer forty than thirty, and I know the kind you are.

RHYME a a *
 
Harrer an' Trinity College!  I ought to ha' sent you to sea --
But I stood you an education, an' what have you done for me?
The things I knew was proper you wouldn't thank me to give,
And the things I knew was rotten you said was the way to live.
For you muddled with books and pictures, an' china an' etchin's an' fans,
And your rooms at college was beastly -- more like a whore's than a man's --
Till you married that thin-flanked woman, as white and as stale as a bone,
An' she gave you your social nonsense; but where's that kid o' your own?
I've seen your carriages blocking the half o' the Cromwell Road,
But never the doctor's brougham to help the missus unload.

RHYME a a *
 
(So there isn't even a grandchild, an' the Gloster family's done.)
Not like your mother, she isn't.  ~She~ carried her freight each run.
But they died, the pore little beggars!  At sea she had 'em -- they died.
Only you, an' you stood it; you haven't stood much beside.
Weak, a liar, and idle, and mean as a collier's whelp
Nosing for scraps in the galley.  No help -- my son was no help!
So he gets three hundred thousand, in trust and the interest paid.
I wouldn't give it you, Dickie -- you see, I made it in trade.
You're saved from soiling your fingers, and if you have no child,
It all comes back to the business.  Gad, won't your wife be wild!
'Calls and calls in her carriage, her handkerchief up to her eye:
"Daddy! dear daddy's dyin'!" and doing her best to cry.
Grateful?  Oh, yes, I'm grateful, but keep her away from here.
Your mother hud never ha' stood 'er, and, anyhow, women are queer. . . .

RHYME a a *
 
There's women will say I've married a second time.Not quite!  
But give pore Aggie a hundred, and tell her your lawyers'll fight.
She was the best o' the boiling -- you'll meet her before it ends;
I'm in for a row with the mother -- I'll leave you settle my friends:
For a man he must go with a woman, which women don't understand --
Or the sort that say they can see it they aren't the marrying brand.
But I wanted to speak o' your mother that's Lady Gloster still --
I'm going to up and see her, without it's hurting the will.
Here!  Take your hand off the bell-pull.  Five thousand's waiting for you,
If you'll only listen a minute, and do as I bid you do.
They'll try to prove me crazy, and, if you bungle, they can;
And I've only you to trust to!  (O God, why ain't he a man?)

RHYME a a *
 
There's some waste money on marbles, the same as M'Cullough tried --
Marbles and mausoleums -- but I call that sinful pride.
There's some ship bodies for burial -- we've carried 'em, soldered and packed;
Down in their wills they wrote it, and nobody called ~them~ cracked.
But me -- I've too much money, and people might. . . .  All my fault:
It come o' hoping for grandsons and buying that Wokin' vault.
I'm sick o' the whole dam' business; I'm going back where I came.
Dick, you're the son o' my body, and you'll take charge o' the same!
I want to lie by your mother, ten thousand mile away,
And they'll want to send me to Woking; and that's where you'll earn your pay.
I've thought it out on the quiet, the same as it ought to be done --
Quiet, and decent, and proper -- an' here's your orders, my son.

RHYME a a *
 
You know the Line?  You don't, though.  You write to the Board, and tell
Your father's death has upset you an' you're goin' to cruise for a spell,
An' you'd like the ~Mary Gloster~ -- I've held her ready for this --
They'll put her in working order and you'll take her out as she is.
Yes, it was money idle when I patched her and put her aside
(Thank God, I can pay for my fancies!) -- the boat where your mother died,
By the Little Paternosters, as you come to the Union Bank,
We dropped her -- I think I told you -- and I pricked it off where she sank --
['Tiny she looked on the grating -- that oily, treacly sea --]
'Hundred and eighteen East, remember, and South just three.

RHYME a a *
 
Easy bearings to carry -- three South -- three to the dot;
But I gave MHAndrew a copy in case of dying -- or not.
And so you'll write to MHAndrew, he's Chief of the Maori Line;
They'll give him leave, if you ask 'em and say it's business o' mine.
I built three boats for the Maoris, an' very well pleased they were,
An' I've known Mac since the Fifties, and Mac knew me -- and her.
After the first stroke warned me I sent him the money to keep
Against the time you'd claim it, committin' your dad to the deep;

RHYME a a *
 
For you are the son o' my body, and Mac was my oldest friend,
I've never asked him to dinner, but he'll see it out to the end.
Stiff-necked Glasgow beggar, I've heard he's prayed for my soul,
But he couldn't lie if you paid him, and he'd starve before he stole!
He'll take the ~Mary~ in ballast -- you'll find her a lively ship;
And you'll take Sir Anthony Gloster, that goes on his wedding-trip,
Lashed in our old deck-cabin with all three port-holes wide,
The kick o' the screw beneath him and the round blue seas outside!
Sir Anthony Gloster's carriage -- our house-flag flyin' free --
Ten thousand men on the pay-roll and forty freighters at sea!

RHYME a a *
 
He made himself and a million, but this world is a fleetin' show,
And he'll go to the wife of his bosom the same as he ought to go --
By the heel of the Paternosters -- there isn't a chance to mistake --
And Mac'll pay you the money as soon as the bubbles break!
Five thousand for six weeks' cruising, the staunchest freighter afloat,
And Mac he'll give you your bonus the minute I'm out o' the boat!
He'll take you round to Macassar, and you'll come back alone;
He knows what I want o' the ~Mary~. . . .  I'll do what I please with my own.
Your mother hud call it wasteful, but I've seven-and-thirty more;
I'll come in my private carriage and bid it wait at the door. . . .
For my son he was never a credit:  he muddled with books and art,
And he lived on Sir Anthony's money and he broke Sir Anthony's heart.
There isn't even a grandchild, and the Gloster family's done --
The only one you left me, O mother, the only one!

RHYME a a *
 
Harrer and Trinity College -- me slavin' early an' late --
An' he thinks I'm dying crazy, and you're in Macassar Strait!
Flesh o' my flesh, my dearie, for ever an' ever amen,
That first stroke come for a warning; I ought to ha' gone to you then,
But -- cheap repairs for a cheap hun -- the doctors said I'd do:
Mary, why didn't ~you~ warn me?  I've allus heeded to you,
Excep' -- I know -- about women; but you are a spirit now;
An', wife, they was only women, and I was a man.  That's how.
An' a man he must go with a woman, as you could not understand;
But I never talked 'em secrets.  I paid 'em out o' hand.

RHYME a a *
 
Thank Gawd, I can pay for my fancies!  Now what's five thousand to me,
For a berth off the Paternosters in the haven where I would be?
~I~ believe in the Resurrection, if I read my Bible plain,
But I wouldn't trust 'em at Wokin'; we're safer at sea again.
For the heart it shall go with the treasure -- go down to the sea in ships.
I'm sick of the hired women -- I'll kiss my girl on her lips!
I'll be content with my fountain, I'll drink from my own well,
And the wife of my youth shall charm me -- an' the rest can go to Hell!
(Dickie, ~he~ will, that's certain.)  I'll lie in our standin'-bed,
An' Mac'll take her in ballast -- an' she trims best by the head. . . .
Down by the head an' sinkin', her fires are drawn and cold,
And the water's splashin' hollow on the skin of the empty hold --
Churning an' choking and chuckling, quiet and scummy and dark --
Full to her lower hatches and risin' steady.  Hark!
That was the after-bulkhead. . . .  She's flooded from stem to stern. . . .
Never seen death yet, Dickie? . . .  Well, now is your time to learn!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
     When HOmer smote his bloomin' lyre,
      He'd heard men sing by land an' sea;
     An' what he thought he might require,
      HE went an' took -- the same as me!
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
     The market-girls an' fishermen,
      The shepherds an' the sailors, too,
     They heard old songs turn up again,
       But kep' it quiet -- same as you!
 
RHYME a b a b   
 
     They knew he stole; he knew they knowed.
      They didn't tell, nor make a fuss,
     But winked at HOmer down the road,
      An' he winked back -- the same as us!
 
TITLE
 
RHYME a b c c b 
 
When the Waters were dried an' the Earth did appear,
 ("It's all one," says the Sapper),
The Lord He created the Engineer,
 Her Majesty's Royal Engineer,
 With the rank and pay of a Sapper!

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM a a b
 
When the Flood come along for an extra monsoon,
'Twas Noah constructed the first pontoon
    To the plans of Her Majesty's, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM c c b
 
But after fatigue in the wet an' the sun,
Old Noah got drunk, which he wouldn't ha' done
    If he'd trained with, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM d d b
 
When the Tower o' Babel had mixed up men's bat,
Some clever civilian was managing that,
    An' none of, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM e e b
 
When the Jews had a fight at the foot of a hill,
Young Joshua ordered the sun to stand still,
    For he was a Captain of Engineers, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM f f b
 
When the Children of Israel made bricks without straw,
They were learnin' the regular work of our Corps,
    The work of, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM g g b
 
For ever since then, if a war they would wage,
Behold us a-shinin' on history's page �
    First page for, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM h h b
 
We lay down their sidings an' help 'em entrain,
An' we sweep up their mess through the bloomin' campaign,
    In the style of, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM i i b
 
They send us in front with a fuse an' a mine
To blow up the gates that are rushed by the Line,
    But bent by, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM j j b
 
They send us behind with a pick an' a spade,
To dig for the guns of a bullock-brigade
    Which has asked for, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM k k b
 
We work under escort in trousers and shirt,
An' the heathen they plug us tail-up in the dirt,
    Annoying, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM l l b
 
We blast out the rock an' we shovel the mud,
We make 'em good roads an' � they roll down the khud,
    Reporting, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM m m b
 
We make 'em their bridges, their wells, an' their huts,
An' the telegraph-wire the enemy cuts,
    An' it's blamed on, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM n n b
 
An' when we return, an' from war we would cease,
They grudge us adornin' the billets of peace,
    Which are kept for, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM o o b
 
We build 'em nice barracks � they swear they are bad,
That our Colonels are Methodist, married or mad,
    Insultin', etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM p p b
 
They haven't no manners nor gratitude too,
For the more that we help 'em, the less will they do,
    But mock at, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM q q b
 
Now the Line's but a man with a gun in his hand,
An' Cavalry's only what horses can stand,
    When helped by, etc.

RHYME a a b
RHYME-POEM r r b
 
Artillery moves by the leave o' the ground,
But we are the men that do something all round,
    For we are, etc.

RHYME a b a b b b

I have stated it plain, an' my argument's thus
    ("It's all one," says the Sapper),
There's only one Corps which is perfect � that's us;
    An' they call us Her Majesty's Engineers,
    Her Majesty's Royal Engineers,
    With the rank and pay of a Sapper!

TITLE

RHYME a b c b 
  
It got beyond all orders an' it got beyond all hope;
 It got to shammin' wounded an' retirin' from the halt.
whole companies was lookin' for the nearest road to slope;
 It were just a bloomin' knock-out -- an' our fault!
 
RHYME a b c b 
  
     Now there ain't no chorus here to give,
      Nor there ain't no band to play;
     An' I wish I was dead 'fore I done what I did,
      Or seen what I seed that day!
 
RHYME a b c b 
  
We was sick o' bein' punished, an' we let 'em know it, too;
 An' a company-commander up an' hit us with a sword,
An' some one shouted "HOok it!" an' it come to ~sove-ki-poo~,
 An' we chucked our rifles from us -- O my Gawd!
 
RHYME a b c b 
  
There was thirty dead an' wounded on the ground we wouldn't keep --
 No, there wasn't more than twenty when the front begun to go;
But, Christ! along the line o' flight they cut us up like sheep,
 An' that was all we gained by doin' so.
 
RHYME a b c b 
  
I heard the knives behind me, but I dursn't face my man,
 Nor I don't know where I went to, 'cause I didn't halt to see,
Till I heard a beggar squealin' out for quarter as he ran,
 An' I thought I knew the voice an' -- it was me!

RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they was rookies in their time --
 So was them that fought at Waterloo!
All the whole command, yuss, from Minden to Maiwand,
 They was once dam' sweeps like you!
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
     Then do not be discouraged, HEaven is your helper,
      We'll learn you not to forget;
     An' you mustn't swear an' curse, or you'll only catch it worse,
      For we'll make you soldiers yet!
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they had stocks beneath their chins,
 Six inch high an' more;
But fatigue it was their pride, and they ~would~ not be denied
 To clean the cook-house floor.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they had anarchistic bombs
 Served to 'em by name of hand-grenades;
But they got it in the eye (same as you will by-an'-by)
 When they clubbed their field-parades.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they had buttons up an' down,
 Two-an'-twenty dozen of 'em told;
But they didn't grouse an' shirk at an hour's extry work,
 They kept 'em bright as gold.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they was armed with musketoons,
 Also, they was drilled by halberdiers;
I don't know what they were, but the sergeants took good care
 They washed behind their ears.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they had ever cash in hand
 Which they did not bank nor save,
But spent it gay an' free on their betters -- such as me --
 For the good advice I gave.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they was civil -- yuss, they was --
 Never didn't talk o' rights an' wrongs,
But they got it with the toe (same as you will get it -- so!) --
 For interrupting songs.
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
The men that fought at Minden, they was several other things
 Which I don't remember clear;
But ~that's~ the reason why, now the six-year men are dry,
 The rooks will stand the beer!
 
RHYME a b c b  
 
     Then do not be discouraged, HEaven is your helper,
      We'll learn you not to forget;
     An' you mustn't swear an' curse, or you'll only catch it worse,
      For we'll make you soldiers yet!
 
TITLE

RHYME a a b b 
 
We've got the cholerer in camp -- it's worse than forty fights;
 We're dyin' in the wilderness the same as Isrulites;
It's before us, an' behind us, an' we cannot get away,
 An' the doctor's just reported we've ten more to-day!
 
RHYME a a b c c c b 

     Oh, strike your camp an' go, the Bugle's callin',
        The Rains are fallin' --
     The dead are bushed an' stoned to keep 'em safe below;
     The Band's a-doin' all she knows to cheer us;
     The Chaplain's gone and prayed to Gawd to hear us --
        To hear us --
     O Lord, for it's a-killin' of us so!
 
RHYME a a b b 

Since August, when it started, it's been stickin' to our tail,
Though they've had us out by marches an' they've had us back by rail;
But it runs as fast as troop-trains, and we cannot get away;
An' the sick-list to the Colonel makes ten more to-day.
 
RHYME a a b b 

There ain't no fun in women nor there ain't no bite to drink;
It's much too wet for shootin', we can only march and think;
An' at evenin', down the ~nullahs~, we can hear the jackals say,
"Get up, you rotten beggars, you've ten more to-day!"
 
RHYME a a b b 

'Twould make a monkey cough to see our way o' doin' things --
Lieutenants takin' companies an' captains takin' wings,
An' Lances actin' Sergeants -- eight file to obey --
For we've lots o' quick promotion on ten deaths a day!
 
RHYME a a b b 

Our Colonel's white an' twitterly -- he gets no sleep nor food,
But mucks about in 'orspital where nothing does no good.
HE sends us heaps o' comforts, all bought from his pay --
But there aren't much comfort handy on ten deaths a day.
 
RHYME a a b b 

Our Chaplain's got a banjo, an' a skinny mule he rides,
An' the stuff he says an' sings us, Lord, it makes us split our sides!
With his black coat-tails a-bobbin' to ~Ta-ra-ra Boomderay!~
he's the proper kind o' ~padre~ for ten deaths a day.
 
RHYME a a b b 

An' Father Victor helps him with our Roman Catholicks --
He knows an heap of Irish songs an' rummy conjurin' tricks;
An' the two they works together when it comes to play or pray;
So we keep the ball a-rollin' on ten deaths a day.
 
RHYME a a b b 

We've got the cholerer in camp -- we've got it hot an' sweet;
It ain't no Christmas dinner, but it's helped an' we must eat.
We've gone beyond the funkin', 'cause we've found it doesn't pay,
An' we're rockin' round the Districk on ten deaths a day!
 
RHYME a a b c c d d b b b b e

Then strike your camp an' go, the Rains are fallin',
            The Bugle's callin'!
    The dead are bushed an' stoned to keep 'em safe below!
    An' them that do not like it they can lump it,
    An' them that cannot stand it they can jump it;
    We've got to die somewhere � some way � some'ow �
    We might as well begin to do it now!
    Then, Number One, let down the tent-pole slow,
    Knock out the pegs an' 'old the corners � so!
    Fold in the flies, furl up the ropes, an' stow!
    Oh, strike � oh, strike your camp an' go!
            (Gawd 'elp us!)

TITLE

RHYME a b c b * 
 
There was Rundle, Station Master,
 An' Beazeley of the Rail,
An' HAckman, Commissariat,
 An' Donkin' o' the Jail;
An' Blake, Conductor-Sargent,
 Our Master twice was he,
With him that kept the Europe-shop,
 Old Framjee Eduljee.
 
RHYME a a b b 

     Outside -- "Sergeant!  Sir!  Salute!  Salaam!"
     Inside -- "Brother", an' it doesn't do no harm.
     We met upon the Level an' we parted on the Square,
     An' I was Junior Deacon in my Mother-Lodge out there!
 
RHYME a b c b *

We'd Bola Nath, Accountant,
 An' Saul the Aden Jew,
An' Din Mohammed, draughtsman
 Of the Survey Office too;
There was Babu Chuckerbutty,
 An' Amir Singh the Sikh,
An' Castro from the fittin'-sheds,
 The Roman Catholick!
 
RHYME a b c b *

We hadn't good regalia,
 An' our Lodge was old an' bare,
But we knew the Ancient Landmarks,
 An' we kep' 'em to a hair;
An' lookin' on it backwards
 It often strikes me thus,
There ain't such things as infidels,
 Excep', perhaps, it's us.
 
RHYME a b c b *

For monthly, after Labour,
 We'd all sit down and smoke
(We dursn't give no banquits,
 Lest a Brother's caste were broke),
An' man on man got talkin'
 Religion an' the rest,
An' every man comparin'
 Of the God he knew the best.
 
RHYME a b c b *

So man on man got talkin',
 An' not a Brother stirred
Till mornin' waked the parrots
 An' that dam' brain-fever-bird;
We'd say 'twas highly curious,
 An' we'd all ride home to bed,
With Mohammed, God, an' Shiva
 Changin' pickets in our head.
 
RHYME a b c b *

Full oft on Guv'ment service
 This rovin' foot hath pressed,
An' bore fraternal greetin's
 To the Lodges east an' west,
Accordin' as commanded
 From Kohat to Singapore,
But I wish that I might see them
 In my Mother-Lodge once more!
 
RHYME a b c b *

I wish that I might see them,
 My Brethren black an' brown,
With the trichies smellin' pleasant
 An' the ~hog-darn~ passin' down;                          
An' the old khansamah snorin'                              
 On the bottle-khana floor,                                
Like a Master in good standing
 With my Mother-Lodge once more!
 
RHYME a a b b 

     Outside -- "Sergeant!  Sir!  Salute!  Salaam!"
     Inside -- "Brother", an' it doesn't do no harm.
     We met upon the Level an' we parted on the Square,
     An' I was Junior Deacon in my Mother-Lodge out there!

TITLE

RHYME a b c b   
 
   There was no one like him, horse or Foot,
    Nor any o' the Guns I knew;
An' because it was so, why, o' course he went an' died,
    Which is just what the best men do.
 
RHYME a b c b   
 
   HIs mare she neighs the whole day long,
    She paws the whole night through,
An' she won't take her feed 'cause o' waitin' for his step,
    Which is just what a beast would do.
 
RHYME a b c b   
 
   HIs girl she goes with a bombardier
    Before her month is through;
An' the banns are up in church, for she's got the beggar hooked,
    Which is just what a girl would do.
 
RHYME a b c b   
 
   We fought 'bout a dog -- last week it were --
    No more than a round or two;
But I strook him cruel hard, an' I wish I hadn't now,
    Which is just what a man can't do.
 
RHYME a b c b   
 
   HE was all that I had in the way of a friend,
    An' I've had to find one new;
But I'd give my pay an' stripe for to get the beggar back,
    Which it's just too late to do.
 
RHYME a a b b 
 
          Take him away!  he's gone where the best men go.
          Take him away!  An' the gun-wheels turnin' slow.
          Take him away!  There's more from the place he come.
          Take him away, with the limber an' the drum.

TITLE

RHYME  a b c b *
 
HE was warned agin' her --
 That's what made him look;
She was warned agin' him --
 That is why she took.
'Wouldn't hear no reason,
 'Went an' done it blind;
We know all about 'em,
 They've got all to find!
  
RHYME  a b c b *
 
What's the use o' tellin'
 HArf the lot she's been?
he's a bloomin' robber,
 ~An'~ he keeps canteen.
HOw did he get his buggy?
 Gawd, you needn't ask!
'Made his forty gallon
 Out of every cask!
 
RHYME  a b c b *
 
Watch him, with his hair cut,
 Count us filin' by --
Won't the Colonel praise his
 Pop -- u -- lar -- i -- ty!
We have scores to settle --
 Scores for more than beer;
She's the girl to pay 'em --
 That is why we're here!
 
RHYME  a b c b *
 
See the chaplain thinkin'?
 See the women smile?
Twig the married winkin'
 As they take the aisle?
Keep your side-arms quiet,
 Dressin' by the Band.
Ho!  You holy beggars,
 Cough behind your hand!
 
RHYME  a b c b *
 
Now it's done an' over,
 HEar the organ squeak,
"~'Voice that breathed o'er Eden~" --
 Ain't she got the cheek!
White an' laylock ribbons,
 Think yourself so fine!
I'd pray Gawd to take yer
 'Fore I made yer mine!
 
RHYME  a b c b *
 
Escort to the kerridge,
 Wish him luck, the brute!
Chuck the slippers after --
 [Pity 'tain't a boot!]
Bowin' like a lady,
 Blushin' like a lad --
'Oo would say to see 'em
 Both is rotten bad?

TITLE
 
RHYME a b a b * 
 
Through the Plagues of Egyp' we was chasin' Arabi,
 Gettin' down an' shovin' in the sun;
An' you might have called us dirty, an' you might ha' called us dry,
 An' you might have heard us talkin' at the gun.
But the Captain had his jacket, an' the jacket it was new --
 (horse Gunners, listen to my song!)
An' the wettin' of the jacket is the proper thing to do,
 Nor we didn't keep him waitin' very long.
 
RHYME a b a b * 
 
One day they gave us orders for to shell a sand redoubt,
 Loadin' down the axle-arms with case;
But the Captain knew his dooty, an' he took the crackers out
 An' he put some proper liquor in its place.
An' the Captain saw the shrapnel, which is six-an'-thirty clear.
 (horse Gunners, listen to my song!)
"Will you draw the weight," sez he, "or will you draw the beer?"
 An' we didn't keep him waitin' very long.
 
RHYME a b a b * 
 
Then we trotted gentle, not to break the bloomin' glass,
 Though the Arabites had all their ranges marked;
But we dursn't hardly gallop, for the most was bottled Bass,
 An' we'd dreamed of it since we was disembarked:
So we fired economic with the shells we had in hand,
 (horse Gunners, listen to my song!)
But the beggars under cover had the impidence to stand,
 An' we couldn't keep 'em waitin' very long.
 
RHYME a b a b * 
 
So we finished harf the liquor (an' the Captain took champagne),
 An' the Arabites was shootin' all the while;
An' we left our wounded happy with the empties on the plain,
 An' we used the bloomin' guns for pro-jec-tile!
We limbered up an' galloped -- there were nothin' else to do --
 (horse Gunners, listen to my song!)
An' the Battery came a-boundin' like a boundin' kangaroo,
 But they didn't watch us comin' very long.
 
RHYME a b a b * 
 
We was goin' most extended -- we was drivin' very fine,
 An' the Arabites were loosin' high an' wide,
Till the Captain took the glassy with a rattlin' right incline,
 An' we dropped upon their heads the other side.
Then we give 'em quarter -- such as hadn't up and cut,
 (horse Gunners, listen to my song!)
An' the Captain stood a limberful of fizzy -- somethin' Brutt,
 But we didn't leave it fizzing very long.
 
RHYME a b a b 
 
We might ha' been court-martialled, but it all come out all right
 When they signalled us to join the main command.
There was every round expended, there was every gunner tight,
 An' the Captain waved a corkscrew in his hand.
 
TITLE

RHYME a a *
 
The heathen in his blindness bows down to wood an' stone;
HE don't obey no orders unless they is his own;
HE keeps his side-arms awful:  he leaves 'em all about,
An' then comes up the regiment an' pokes the heathen out.
 
RHYME a a *
 
     All along o' dirtiness, all along o' mess,
     All along o' doin' things rather-more-or-less,
     All along of abby-nay, kul, an' hazar-ho, *
     Mind you keep your rifle an' yourself jus' so!
 
RHYME a a *
 
The young recruit is haughty -- he draf's from Gawd knows where;
They bid him show his stockin's an' lay his mattress square;
HE calls it bloomin' nonsense -- he doesn't know no more --
An' then up comes his Company an' kicks him round the floor!
 
RHYME a a *
 
The young recruit is hammered -- he takes it very hard;
HE hangs his head an' mutters -- he sulks about the yard;
HE talks o' "cruel tyrants" he'll swing for by-an'-by,
An' the others hears an' mocks him, an' the boy goes orf to cry.
 
RHYME a a *
 
The young recruit is silly -- he thinks o' suicide;
he's lost his gutter-devil; he hasn't got his pride;
But day by day they kicks him, which helps him on a bit,
Till he finds hisself one mornin' with a full an' proper kit.
 
RHYME a a *
 
     Gettin' clear o' dirtiness, gettin' done with mess,
     Gettin' shut o' doin' things rather-more-or-less;
     Not so fond of abby-nay, kul, nor hazar-ho,
     Learns to keep his rifle an' hisself jus' so!
 
RHYME a a *
 
The young recruit is happy -- he throws a chest to suit;
You see him grow mustaches; you hear him slap his boot;
HE learns to drop the "bloodies" from every word he slings,
An' he shows an healthy brisket when he strips for bars an' rings.
 
RHYME a a *
 
The cruel-tyrant-sergeants they watch him harf a year;
They watch him with his comrades, they watch him with his beer;
They watch him with the women at the regimental dance,
And the cruel-tyrant-sergeants send his name along for "Lance".
 
RHYME a a *
 
An' now he's harf o' nothin', an' all a private yet,
HIs room they up an' rags him to see what they will get;
They rags him low an' cunnin', each dirty trick they can,
But he learns to sweat his temper an' he learns to sweat his man.
 
RHYME a a *
 
An', last, a Colour-Sergeant, as such to be obeyed,
HE schools his men at cricket, he tells 'em on parade;
They sees 'em quick an' handy, uncommon set an' smart,
An' so he talks to orficers which have the Core at heart.
 
RHYME a a *
 
HE learns to do his watchin' without it showin' plain;
HE learns to save a dummy, an' shove him straight again;
HE learns to check a ranker that's buyin' leave to shirk;
An' he learns to make men like him so they'll learn to like their work.
 
RHYME a a *
 
An' when it comes to marchin' he'll see their socks are right,
An' when it comes to action he shows 'em how to sight;
HE knows their ways of thinkin' and just what's in their mind;
HE knows when they are takin' on an' when they've fell behind.
 
RHYME a a *
 
HE knows each talkin' corpril that leads a squad astray;
HE feels his innards heavin', his bowels givin' way;
HE sees the blue-white faces all tryin' hard to grin,
An' he stands an' waits an' suffers till it's time to cap 'em in.
 
RHYME a a *
 
An' now the hugly bullets come peckin' through the dust,
An' no one wants to face 'em, but every beggar must;
So, like a man in irons which isn't glad to go,
They moves 'em off by companies uncommon stiff an' slow.
 
RHYME a a *
 
Of all his five years' schoolin' they don't remember much
Excep' the not retreatin', the step an' keepin' touch.
It looks like teachin' wasted when they duck an' spread an' hop,
But if he hadn't learned 'em they'd be all about the shop!
 
RHYME a a *
 
An' now it's "'Oo goes backward?" an' now it's "'Oo comes on?"
And now it's "Get the doolies," an' now the captain's gone;
An' now it's bloody murder, but all the while they hear
HIs voice, the same as barrick drill, a-shepherdin' the rear.
 
RHYME a a *
 
he's just as sick as they are, his heart is like to split,
But he works 'em, works 'em, works 'em till he feels 'em take the bit;
The rest is holdin' steady till the watchful bugles play,
An' he lifts 'em, lifts 'em, lifts 'em through the charge that wins the day!
 
RHYME a a *
 
     The heathen in his blindness bows down to wood an' stone;
     HE don't obey no orders unless they is his own;
     The heathen in his blindness must end where he began,
     But the backbone of the Army is the non-commissioned man!
 
RHYME a a *
 
     Keep away from dirtiness -- keep away from mess.
     Don't get into doin' things rather-more-or-less!
     Let's ha' done with abby-nay, kul, an' hazar-ho;
     Mind you keep your rifle an' yourself jus' so!
 
TITLE

RHYME a b c b *
 
Sez the Junior Orderly Sergeant
 To the Senior Orderly Man:
"Our Orderly Orf'cer's ~hokee-mut~,
 You help him all you can.
For the wine was old and the night is cold,
 An' the best we may go wrong,
So, 'fore he gits to the sentry-box,
 You pass the word along."
 
RHYME a b a b
 
     So it was "Rounds!  What Rounds?" at two of a frosty night,
      he's holdin' on by the sergeant's sash, but, sentry, shut your eye.
     An' it was "Pass!  All's well!"  Oh, ain't he drippin' tight!
      HE'll need an affidavit pretty badly by-an'-by.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
The moon was white on the barricks,
 The road was white an' wide,
An' the Orderly Orf'cer took it all,
 An' the ten-foot ditch beside.
An' the corporal pulled an' the sergeant pushed,
 An' the three they danced along,
But I'd shut my eyes in the sentry-box,
 So I didn't see nothin' wrong.
  
RHYME a b c b *
 
'Twas after four in the mornin';
 We had to stop the fun,
An' we sent him home on a bullock-cart,
 With his belt an' stock undone;
But we sluiced him down an' we washed him out,
 An' a first-class job we made,
When we saved him, smart as a bombardier,
 For six-o'clock parade.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
The drill was long an' heavy,
 The sky was hot an' blue,
An' his eye was wild an' his hair was wet,
 But his sergeant pulled him through.
Our men was good old trusties --
 They'd done it on their head;
But you ought to have heard 'em markin' time
 To hide the things he said!
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
There was two-an'-thirty sergeants,
 There was corp'rals forty-one,
There was just nine hundred rank an' file
 To swear to a touch o' sun.
There was me he'd kissed in the sentry-box,
 As I have not told in my song,
But I took my oath, which were Bible truth,
 I hadn't seen nothin' wrong.
 
RHYME a b c b *
 
There's them that's hot an' haughty,
 There's them that's cold an' hard,
But there comes a night when the best gets tight,
 And then turns out the Guard.
I've seen them hide their liquor
 In every kind o' way,
But most depends on makin' friends
 With Privit Thomas A.!
 
TITLE

RHYME a b a b b c b c

You call yourself a man,
 For all you used to swear,
An' leave me, as you can,
 My certain shame to bear?
 I hear!  You do not care --
You done the worst you know.
 I hate you, grinnin' there. . . .
Ah, Gawd, I love you so!
 
RHYME a a b b

     Nice while it lasted, an' now it is over --
     Tear out your heart an' good-bye to your lover!
     What's the use o' grievin', when the mother that bore you
     (Mary, pity women!) knew it all before you?
 
RHYME a b a b b c b c

It aren't no false alarm,
 The finish to your fun;
You -- you have brung the harm,
 An' I'm the ruined one;
 An' now you'll off an' run
With some new fool in tow.
 Your heart?  You haven't none. . . .
Ah, Gawd, I love you so!
 
RHYME a a b b

     When a man is tired there is naught will bind him;
     All he solemn promised he will shove behind him.
     What's the good o' prayin' for The Wrath to strike him
     (Mary, pity women!), when the rest are like him?
 
RHYME a b a b b c b c 

What hope for me or -- it?
 What's left for us to do?
I've walked with men a bit,
 But this -- but this is you.
So help me Christ, it's true!
 Where can I hide or go?
You coward through and through! . . .
Ah, Gawd, I love you so!

RHYME a a b b

      All the more you give 'em the less are they for givin' --
     Love lies dead, an' you cannot kiss him livin'.
     Down the road he led you there is no returnin'
     (Mary, pity women!), but you're late in learnin'!
 
RHYME a b a b b c b c 

You'd like to treat me fair?
 You can't, because we're pore?
We'd starve?  What do I care!
 We might, but ~this~ is shore!
 I want the name -- no more --
The name, an' lines to show,
 An' not to be an whore. . . .
Ah, Gawd, I love you so!

RHYME a a b b

      What's the good o' pleadin', when the mother that bore you
     (Mary, pity women!) knew it all before you?
     Sleep on his promises an' wake to your sorrow
     (Mary, pity women!), for we sail to-morrow!
  
TITLE

RHYME a b a b *
 
The Injian Ocean sets an' smiles
 So sof', so bright, so bloomin' blue;
There aren't a wave for miles an' miles
 Excep' the jiggle from the screw.
The ship is swep', the day is done,
 The bugle's gone for smoke and play;
An' black agin' the settin' sun
 The Lascar sings, "~Hum deckty hai!~"
 
RHYME a b a b 

     For to admire an' for to see,
      For to behold this world so wide --
     It never done no good to me,
      But I can't drop it if I tried!
 
RHYME a b c b *

I see the sergeants pitchin' quoits,
 I hear the women laugh an' talk,
I spy upon the quarter-deck
 The orficers an' lydies walk.
I thinks about the things that was,
 An' leans an' looks acrost the sea,
Till spite of all the crowded ship
 There's no one lef' alive but me.
 
RHYME a b c b *

The things that was which I have seen,
 In barrick, camp, an' action too,
I tells them over by myself,
 An' sometimes wonders if they're true;
For they was odd -- most awful odd --
 But all the same now they are o'er,
There must be heaps o' plenty such,
 An' if I wait I'll see some more.
 
RHYME a b c b *

Oh, I have come upon the books,
 An' frequent broke a barrick rule,
An' stood beside an' watched myself
 Behavin' like a bloomin' fool.
I paid my price for findin' out,
 Nor never grutched the price I paid,
But sat in Clink without my boots,
 Admirin' how the world was made.
 
RHYME a b c b *

Behold a crowd upon the beam,
 An' humped above the sea appears
Old Aden, like a barrick-stove
 That no one's lit for years an' years!
I passed by that when I began,
 An' I go home the road I came,
A time-expired soldier-man
 With six years' service to his name.
 
RHYME a b c b *

My girl she said, "Oh, stay with me!"
 My mother held me to her breast.
They've never written none, an' so
 They must have gone with all the rest --
With all the rest which I have seen
 An' found an' known an' met along.
I cannot say the things I feel,
 And so I sing my evenin' song:
 
TITLE

RHYME a a * 
 
When Earth's last picture is painted and the tubes are twisted and dried,
When the oldest colours have faded, and the youngest critic has died,
We shall rest, and, faith, we shall need it -- lie down for an ]aeon or two,
Till the Master of All Good Workmen shall put us to work anew!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And those that were good shall be happy:  they shall sit in a golden chair;
They shall splash at a ten-league canvas with brushes of comets' hair;
They shall find real saints to draw from -- Magdalene, Peter, and Paul;
They shall work for an age at a sitting and never be tired at all!
 
RHYME a a * 
 
And only the Master shall praise us, and only the Master shall blame;
And no one shall work for money, and no one shall work for fame,
But each for the joy of the working, and each, in his separate star,
Shall draw the Thing as he sees It for the God of Things as They Are!
 
TITLE Recessional

RHYME a b a b c c

God of our fathers, known of old--
  Lord of our far-flung battle line--
Beneath whose awful hand we hold
  Dominion over palm and pine--
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

RHYME a b a b c c

The tumult and the shouting dies--
  The Captains and the Kings depart--
Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,
  An humble and a contrite heart.
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

RHYME a b a b c c

Far-called our navies melt away--
  On dune and headland sinks the fire--
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
  Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

RHYME a b a b c c

If, drunk with sight of power, we loose
  Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe--
Such boastings as the Gentiles use,
  Or lesser breeds without the Law--
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

RHYME a b a b c c

For heathen heart that puts her trust
  In reeking tube and iron shard--
All valiant dust that builds on dust,
  And guarding calls not Thee to guard.
For frantic boast and foolish word,
Thy Mercy on Thy People, Lord!

TITLE

RHYME a b a a a b 

A fool there was and he made his prayer
  (Even as you and I!)
To a rag and a bone and a hank of hair
(We called her the woman who did not care),
But the fool he called her his lady fair
  (Even as you and I!)

RHYME a b c c b 

Oh the years we waste and the tears we waste
  And the work of our head and hand,
Belong to the woman who did not know
(And now we know that she never could know)
  And did not understand.

RHYME a b a a a b 

A fool there was and his goods he spent
  (Even as you and I!)
Honor and faith and a sure intent
But a fool must follow his natural bent
(And it wasn't the least what the lady meant),
  (Even as you and I!)

RHYME a b c c b 

Oh the toil we lost and the spoil we lost
  And the excellent things we planned,
Belong to the woman who didn't know why
(And now we know she never knew why)
  And did not understand.

RHYME a b a a a b 

The fool we stripped to his foolish hide
  (Even as you and I!)
Which she might have seen when she threw him aside--
(But it isn't on record the lady tried)
So some of him lived but the most of him died--
  (Even as you and I!)

RHYME a b c c b 

And it isn't the shame and it isn't the blame
  That stings like a white hot brand.
It's coming to know that she never knew why
(Seeing at last she could never know why)
  And never could understand.

TITLE

RHYME a a

Will you conquer my heart with your beauty; my soul going out from afar?
Shall I fall to your hand as a victim of crafty and cautious shikar?

RHYME a a

Have I met you and passed you already, unknowing, unthinking and blind?
Shall I meet you next session at Simla, O sweetest and best of your kind?

RHYME a a

Does the P. and O. bear you to meward, or, clad in short frocks in the West,
Are you growing the charms that shall capture and torture the heart in my breast?

RHYME a a

Will you stay in the Plains till September--my passion as warm as the day?
Will you bring me to book on the Mountains, or where the thermantidotes play?

RHYME a a

When the light of your eyes shall make pallid the mean lesser lights I pursue,
And the charm of your presence shall lure me from love of the gay "thirteen-two";

RHYME a a

When the peg and the pig-skin shall please not; when I buy me Calcutta-build clothes;
When I quit the Delight of Wild Asses; forswearing the swearing of oaths ;

RHYME a a

As a deer to the hand of the hunter when I turn 'mid the gibes of my friends;
When the days of my freedom are numbered, and the life of the bachelor ends.

RHYME a a

Ah, Goddess! child, spinster, or widow--as of old on Mars Hill whey they raised
To the God that they knew not an altar--so I, a young Pagan, have praised

RHYME a a

The Goddess I know not nor worship; yet, if half that men tell me be true,
You will come in the future, and therefore these verses are written to you.

TITLE

RHYME a a b a 

Now the New Year, reviving last Year's Debt,
The Thoughtful Fisher casteth wide his Net;
  So I with begging Dish and ready Tongue
Assail all Men for all that I can get.

RHYME a a b a 

Imports indeed are gone with all their Dues--
Lo! Salt a Lever that I dare not use,
  Nor may I ask the Tillers in Bengal--
Surely my Kith and Kin will not refuse!

RHYME a a b a 

Pay--and I promise by the Dust of Spring,
Retrenchment.  If my promises can bring
  Comfort, Ye have Them now a thousandfold--
By Allah! I will promise Anything!

RHYME a a b a 

Indeed, indeed, Retrenchment oft before
I swore--but did I mean it when I swore?
  And then, and then, We wandered to the Hills,
And so the Little Less became Much More.

RHYME a a b a 

Whether a Boileaugunge or Babylon,
I know not how the wretched Thing is done,
  The Items of Receipt grow surely small;
The Items of Expense mount one by one.

RHYME a a b a 

I cannot help it. What have I to do
With One and Five, or Four, or Three, or Two?
  Let Scribes spit Blood and Sulphur as they please,
Or Statesmen call me foolish--Heed not you.

RHYME a a b a 

Behold, I promise--Anything You will.
Behold, I greet you with an empty Till--
  Ah! Fellow-Sinners, of your Charity
Seek not the Reason of the Dearth, but fill.

RHYME a a b a 

For if I sinned and fell, where lies the Gain
Of Knowledge? Would it ease you of your Pain
  To know the tangled Threads of Revenue,
I ravel deeper in a hopeless Skein?

RHYME a a b a 

"Who hath not Prudence"--what was it I said,
Of Her who paints her Eyes and tires Her Head,
  And gibes and mocks the People in the Street,
And fawns upon them for Her thriftless Bread?

RHYME a a b a 

Accursed is She of Eve's daughters--She
Hath cast off Prudence, and Her End shall be
  Destruction . . . Brethren, of your Bounty
Some portion of your daily Bread to Me.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a 

  A much-discerning Public hold
    The Singer generally sings
Of personal and private things,
  And prints and sells his past for gold.

RHYME a b b a 

  Whatever I may here disclaim,
    The very clever folk I sing to
    Will most indubitably cling to
  Their pet delusion, just the same.

RHYME a b a b *

I had seen, as the dawn was breaking
  And I staggered to my rest,
Tari Devi softly shaking
  From the Cart Road to the crest.
I had seen the spurs of Jakko
  Heave and quiver, swell and sink.
Was it Earthquake or tobacco,
  Day of Doom, or Night of Drink?

RHYME a b a b *

In the full, fresh fragrant morning
  I observed a camel crawl,
Laws of gravitation scorning,
  On the ceiling and the wall;
Then I watched a fender walking,
  And I heard grey leeches sing,
And a red-hot monkey talking
  Did not seem the proper thing.

RHYME a b a b *

Then a Creature, skinned and crimson,
  Ran about the floor and cried,
And they said that I had the "jims" on,
  And they dosed me with bromide,
And they locked me in my bedroom--
  Me and one wee Blood Red Mouse--
Though I said: "To give my head room
  You had best unroof the house."

RHYME a b a b *

But my words were all unheeded,
  Though I told the grave M.D.
That the treatment really needed
  Was a dip in open sea
That was lapping just below me,
  Smooth as silver, white as snow,
And it took three men to throw me
  When I found I could not go.

RHYME a b a b *

Half the night I watched the Heavens
  Fizz like 'h a  champagne--
Fly to sixes and to sevens,
  Wheel and thunder back again;
And when all was peace and order
  Save one planet nailed askew,
Much I wept because my warder
  Would not let me set it true.

RHYME a b a b *

After frenzied hours of waiting,
  When the Earth and Skies were dumb,
Pealed an awful voice dictating
  An interminable sum,
Changing to a tangle story--
  "What she said you said I said"--
Till the Moon arose in glory,
  And I found her . . . in my head;

RHYME a b a b *

Then a Face came, blind and weeping,
  And It couldn't wipe its eyes,
And It muttered I was keeping
  Back the moonlight from the skies;
So I patted it for pity,
  But it whistled shrill with wrath,
And a huge black Devil City
  Poured its peoples on my path.

RHYME a b a b *

So I fled with steps uncertain
  On a thousand-year long race,
But the bellying of the curtain
  Kept me always in one place;
While the tumult rose and maddened
  To the roar of Earth on fire,
Ere it ebbed and sank and saddened
  To a whisper tense as wire.

RHYME a b a b *

In tolerable stillness
  Rose one little, little star,
And it chuckled at my illness,
  And it mocked me from afar;
And its brethren came and eyed me,
  Called the Universe to aid,
Till I lay, with naught to hide me,
  'Neath the Scorn of All Things Made.

RHYME a b a b *

Dun and saffron, robed and splendid,
  Broke the solemn, pitying Day,
And I knew my pains were ended,
  And I turned and tried to pray;
But my speech was shattered wholly,
  And I wept as children weep.
Till the dawn-wind, softly, slowly,
  Brought to burning eyelids sleep.

TITLE

RHYME a b c b 

I go to concert, party, ball--
  What profit is in these?
I sit alone against the wall
  And strive to look at ease.

RHYME a b c b 

The incense that is mine by right
  They burn before her shrine;
And that's because I'm seventeen
  And She is forty-nine.

RHYME a b c b 

I cannot check my girlish blush,
  My color comes and goes;
I redden to my finger-tips,
  And sometimes to my nose.

RHYME a b c b 

But She is white where white should be,
  And red where red should shine.
The blush that flies at seventeen
  Is fixed at forty-nine.

RHYME a b c b 

I wish I had Her constant cheek;
  I wish that I could sing
All sorts of funny little songs,
  Not quite the proper thing.

RHYME a b c b 

I'm very gauche and very shy,
  Her jokes aren't in my line;
And, worst of all, I'm seventeen
  While She is forty-nine.

RHYME a b c b 

The young men come, the young men go
  Each pink and white and neat,
She's older than their mothers, but
  They grovel at Her feet.

RHYME a b c b 

They walk beside Her 'rickshaw wheels--
  None ever walk by mine;
And that's because I'm seventeen
  And She is forty-nine.

TITLE

RHYME a b c b *

She rides with half a dozen men,
  (She calls them "boys" and "mashers")
I trot along the Mall alone;
  My prettiest frocks and sashes
Don't help to fill my programme-card,
  And vainly I repine
From ten to two A.M. Ah me!
  Would I were forty-nine!

RHYME a b c b

She calls me "darling," "pet," and "dear,"
  And "sweet retiring maid."
I'm always at the back, I know,
  She puts me in the shade.

RHYME a b c b

She introduces me to men,
  "Cast" lovers, I opine,
For sixty takes to seventeen,
  Nineteen to forty-nine.

RHYME a b c b

But even She must older grow
  And end Her dancing days,
She can't go on forever so
  At concerts, balls and plays.

RHYME a b c b

One ray of priceless hope I see
  Before my footsteps shine;
Just think, that She'll be eighty-one
  When I am forty-nine.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Eyes of grey--a sodden quay,
Driving rain and falling tears,
As the steamer wears to sea
In a parting storm of cheers.

RHYME a a b a

  Sing, for Faith and Hope are high--
  None so true as you and I--
  Sing the Lovers' Litany:
  "Love like ours can never die!"

RHYME a b a b

Eyes of black--a throbbing keel,
Milky foam to left and right;
Whispered converse near the wheel
In the brilliant tropic night.

RHYME a a b a

  Cross that rules the Southern Sky!
  Stars that sweep and wheel and fly,
  Hear the Lovers' Litany:
  Love like ours can never die!"

RHYME a b a b

Eyes of brown--a dusty plain
Split and parched with heat of June,
Flying hoof and tightened rein,
Hearts that beat the old, old tune.

RHYME a a b a

  Side by side the horses fly,
  Frame we now the old reply
  Of the Lovers' Litany:
  "Love like ours can never die!"

RHYME a b a b

Eyes of blue--the Simla Hills
Silvered with the moonlight hoar;
Pleading of the waltz that thrills,
Dies and echoes round Benmore.

RHYME a a b a

  "Mabel," "Officers," "Goodbye,"
  Glamour, wine, and witchery--
  On my soul's sincerity,
  "Love like ours can never die!"

RHYME a b a b

Maidens of your charity,
Pity my most luckless state.
Four times Cupid's debtor I--
Bankrupt in quadruplicate.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b a b a b
RHYME-POEM a b a b a b a b

If down here I chance to die,
  Solemnly I beg you take
All that is left of "I"
  To the Hills for old sake's sake,
Pack me very thoroughly
  In the ice that used to slake
Pegs I drank when I was dry--
  This observe for old sake's sake.

RHYME a b a b a b a b
RHYME-POEM a b a b a b a b

To the railway station hie,
  There a single ticket take
For Umballa--goods-train--I
  Shall not mind delay or shake.
I shall rest contentedly
  Spite of clamor coolies make;
Thus in state and dignity
  Send me up for old sake's sake.

RHYME a b a b b a b a 
RHYME-POEM b c b c c b c b

Next the sleepy Babu wake,
  Book a Kalka van "for four."
Few, I think, will care to make
  Journeys with me any more
As they used to do of yore.
  I shall need a "special" break--
Thing I never took before--
  Get me one for old sake's sake.

RHYME a b a b b a b a 
RHYME-POEM b d b d d b d b

After that--arrangements make.
  No hotel will take me in,
And a bullock's back would break
  'Neath the teak and leaden skin
Tonga ropes are frail and thin,
  Or, did I a back-seat take,
In a tonga I might spin,--
  Do your best for old sake's sake.

RHYME a b a b b c b c
RHYME-POEM e f e f f b f b

After that--your work is done.
  Recollect a Padre must
Mourn the dear departed one--
  Throw the ashes and the dust.
Don't go down at once. I trust
  You will find excuse to "snake
Three days' casual on the bust."
  Get your fun for old sake's sake.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 
RHYME-POEM g h g h i b i b

I could never stand the Plains.
  Think of blazing June and May
Think of those September rains
  Yearly till the Judgment Day!
I should never rest in peace,
  I should sweat and lie awake.
Rail me then, on my decease,
  To the Hills for old sake's sake.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

It was an artless Bandar, and he danced upon a pine,
And much I wondered how he lived, and where the beast might dine,
And many, many other things, till, o'er my morning smoke,
I slept the sleep of idleness and dreamt that Bandar spoke.

RHYME a a *

He said: "O man of many clothes! Sad crawler on the Hills!
Observe, I know not Ranken's shop, nor Ranken's monthly bills;
I take no heed to trousers or the coats that you call dress;
Nor am I plagued with little cards for little drinks at Mess.

RHYME a a *

"I steal the bunnia's grain at morn, at noon and eventide,
(For he is fat and I am spare), I roam the mountain side,
I follow no man's carriage, and no, never in my life
Have I flirted at Peliti's with another Bandar's wife.

RHYME a a *

"O man of futile fopperies--unnecessary wraps;
I own no ponies in the hills, I drive no tall-wheeled traps;
I buy me not twelve-button gloves, 'short-sixes' eke, or rings,
Nor do I waste at Hamilton's my wealth on 'pretty things.'

RHYME a a *

"I quarrel with my wife at home, we never fight abroad;
But Mrs. B. has grasped the fact I am her only lord.
I never heard of fever--dumps nor debts depress my soul;
And I pity and despise you!" Here he poached my breakfast-roll.

RHYME a a *

His hide was very mangy, and his face was very red,
And ever and anon he scratched with energy his head.
His manners were not always nice, but how my spirit cried
To be an artless Bandar loose upon the mountain side!

RHYME a a *

So I answered: "Gentle Bandar, an inscrutable Decree
Makes thee a gleesome fleasome Thou, and me a wretched Me.
Go! Depart in peace, my brother, to thy home amid the pine;
Yet forget not once a mortal wished to change his lot for thine."

TITLE

RHYME a b a b *

        Before the beginning of years
        There came to the rule of the State
        Men with a pair of shears,
        Men with an Estimate--
        Strachey with Muir for leaven,
        Lytton with locks that fell,
        Ripon fooling with Heaven,
        And Temple riding like Hell!
        And the bigots took in hand
        Cess and the falling of rain,
        And the measure of sifted sand
        The dealer puts in the grain--
        Imports by land and sea,
        To uttermost decimal worth,
        And registration--free--
        In the houses of death and of birth.

RHYME a b a b *

        And fashioned with pens and paper,
        And fashioned in black and white,
        With Life for a flickering taper
        And Death for a blazing light--
        With the Armed and the Civil Power,
        That his strength might endure for a span--
        From Adam's Bridge to Peshawur,
        The Much Administered Man.

RHYME a b a b 

        In the towns of the North and the East,
        They gathered as unto rule,
        They bade him starve his priest
        And send his children to school.

RHYME a b a b 

        Railways and roads they wrought,
        For the needs of the soil within;
        A time to squabble in court,
        A time to bear and to grin.

RHYME a b a b 

        And gave him peace in his ways,
        Jails--and Police to fight,
        Justice--at length of days,
        And Right--and Might in the Right.

RHYME a b a b 

        His speech is of mortgaged bedding,
        On his kine he borrows yet,
        At his heart is his daughter's wedding,
        In his eye foreknowledge of debt.

RHYME a b a b 

        He eats and hath indigestion,
        He toils and he may not stop;
        His life is a long-drawn question
        Between a crop and a crop.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c

Jane Austen Beecher Stowe de Rouse
  Was good beyond all earthly need;
But, on the other hand, her spouse
  Was very, very bad indeed.
He smoked cigars, called churches slow,
And raced--but this she did not know.

RHYME a b a b c c 

For Belial Machiavelli kept
  The little fact a secret, and,
Though o'er his minor sins she wept,
  Jane Austen did not understand
That Lilly--thirteen-two and bay
Absorbed one-half her husband's pay.

RHYME a b a b c c 

She was so good, she made him worse;
  (Some women are like this, I think;)
He taught her parrot how to curse,
  Her Assam monkey how to drink.
He vexed her righteous soul until
She went up, and he went down hill.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Then came the crisis, strange to say,
  Which turned a good wife to a better.
A telegraphic peon, one day,
  Brought her--now, had it been a letter
For Belial Machiavelli, I
Know Jane would just have let it lie.

RHYME a b a b c c 

But 'twas a telegram instead,
  Marked "urgent," and her duty plain
To open it. Jane Austen read:
  "Your Lilly's got a cough again.
Can't understand why she is kept
At your expense." Jane Austen wept.

RHYME a b a b c c 

It was a misdirected wire.
  Her husband was at Shaitanpore.
She spread her anger, hot as fire,
  Through six thin foreign sheets or more.
Sent off that letter, wrote another
To her solicitor--and mother.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Then Belial Machiavelli saw
  Her error and, I trust, his own,
Wired to the minion of the Law,
  And traveled wifeward--not alone.
For Lilly--thirteen-two and bay--
Came in a horse-box all the way.

RHYME a b a b c c 

There was a scene--a weep or two--
  With many kisses. Austen Jane
Rode Lilly all the season through,
  And never opened wires again.
She races now with Belial. This
Is very sad, but so it is.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a 

Ay, lay him 'neath the Simla pine--
  A fortnight fully to be missed,
  Behold, we lose our fourth at whist,
A chair is vacant where we dine.

RHYME a b b a 

His place forgets him; other men
  Have bought his ponies, guns, and traps.
  His fortune is the Great Perhaps
And that cool rest-house down the glen,

RHYME a b b a 

Whence he shall hear, as spirits may,
  Our mundane revel on the height,
  Shall watch each flashing 'rickshaw-light
Sweep on to dinner, dance, and play.

RHYME a b b a 

Benmore shall woo him to the ball
  With lighted rooms and braying band;
  And he shall hear and understand
"Dream Faces" better than us all.

RHYME a b b a 

For, think you, as the vapours flee
  Across Sanjaolie after rain,
  His soul may climb the hill again
To each field of victory.

RHYME a b b a 

Unseen, who women held so dear,
  The strong man's yearning to his kind
  Shall shake at most the window-blind,
Or dull awhile the card-room's cheer.

RHYME a b b a 

In his own place of power unknown,
  His Light o' Love another's flame,
His dearest pony galloped lame,
And he an alien and alone!

RHYME a b b a 

Yet may he meet with many a friend--
  Shrewd shadows, lingering long unseen
  Among us when "God save the Queen"
Shows even "extras" have an end.

RHYME a b b a 

And, when we leave the heated room,
  And, when at four the lights expire,
  The crew shall gather round the fire
And mock our laughter in the gloom;

RHYME a b b a 

Talk as we talked, and they ere death--
  Flirt wanly, dance in ghostly-wise,
  With ghosts of tunes for melodies,
And vanish at the morning's breath.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Dim dawn behind the tamarisks--the sky is saffron-yellow--
  As the women in the village grind the corn,
And the parrots seek the riverside, each calling to his fellow
  That the Day, the staring Easter Day is born.

RHYME a b a b 

    Oh the white dust on the highway! Oh the stenches in the byway!
      Oh the clammy fog that hovers o'er the earth;
    And at Home they're making merry 'neath the white and scarlet berry--
      What part have India's exiles in their mirth?

RHYME a b a b 

Full day behind the tamarisks--the sky is blue and staring--
  As the cattle crawl afield beneath the yoke,
And they bear One o'er the field-path, who is past all hope or caring,
  To the ghat below the curling wreaths of smoke.

RHYME a b a b 

    Call on Rama, going slowly, as ye bear a brother lowly--
      Call on Rama--he may hear, perhaps, your voice!
    With our hymn-books and our psalters we appeal to other altars,
      And today we bid "good Christian men rejoice!"

RHYME a b a b 

High noon behind the tamarisks--the sun is hot above us--
  As at Home the Christmas Day is breaking wan.
They will drink our healths at dinner--those who tell us how they love us,
  And forget us till another year be gone!

RHYME a b c c b 

    Oh the toil that knows no breaking! Oh the Heimweh, ceaseless, aching!
      Oh the black dividing Sea and alien Plain!
    Youth was cheap--wherefore we sold it.
      Gold was good--we hoped to hold it,
    And today we know the fulness of our gain.

RHYME a b a b 

Grey dusk behind the tamarisks--the parrots fly together--
  As the sun is sinking slowly over Home;
And his last ray seems to mock us shackled in a lifelong tether.
  That drags us back howe'er so far we roam.

RHYME a b c b 

    Hard her service, poor her payment--she is ancient, tattered raiment--
      India, she the grim Stepmother of our kind.
    If a year of life be lent her, if her temple's shrine we enter,
      The door is shut--we may not look behind.

RHYME a b a b 

Black night behind the tamarisks--the owls begin their chorus--
  As the conches from the temple scream and bray.
With the fruitless years behind us, and the hopeless years before us,
  Let us honor, O my brother, Christmas Day!

RHYME a b c b 

    Call a truce, then, to our labors--let us feast with friends and neighbors,
      And be merry as the custom of our caste;
    For if "faint and forced the laughter," and if sadness follow after,
      We are richer by one mocking Christmas past.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

The toad beneath the harrow knows
Exactly where each tooth-point goes.
The butterfly upon the road
Preaches contentment to that toad.

RHYME a a *

Pagett, M.P., was a liar, and a fluent liar therewith--
He spoke of the heat of India as the "Asian Solar Myth";
Came on a four months' visit, to "study the East," in November,
And I got him to sign an agreement vowing to stay till September.

RHYME a a *

March came in with the koil. Pagett was cool and gay,
Called me a "bloated Brahmin," talked of my "princely pay."
March went out with the roses. "Where is your heat?" said he.
"Coming," said I to Pagett, "Skittles!" said Pagett, M.P.

RHYME a a *

April began with the punkah, coolies, and prickly-heat,--
Pagett was dear to mosquitoes, sandflies found him a treat.
He grew speckled and mumpy--hammered, I grieve to say,
Aryan brothers who fanned him, in an illiberal way.

RHYME a a *

May set in with a dust-storm,--Pagett went down with the sun.
All the delights of the season tickled him one by one.
Imprimis--ten day's "liver"--due to his drinking beer;
Later, a dose of fever--slight, but he called it severe.

RHYME a a *

Dysent'ry touched him in June, after the Chota Bursat--
Lowered his portly person--made him yearn to depart.
He didn't call me a "Brahmin," or "bloated," or "overpaid,"
But seemed to think it a wonder that any one stayed.

RHYME a a *

July was a trifle unhealthy,--Pagett was ill with fear.
'Called it the "Cholera Morbus," hinted that life was dear.
He babbled of "Eastern Exile," and mentioned his home with tears;
But I haven't seen my children for close upon seven years.

RHYME a a *

We reached a hundred and twenty once in the Court at noon,
(I've mentioned Pagett was portly) Pagett, went off in a swoon.
That was an end to the business; Pagett, the perjured, fled
With a practical, working knowledge of "Solar Myths" in his head.

RHYME a a *

And I laughed as I drove from the station, but the mirth died out on my lips
As I thought of the fools like Pagett who write of their "Eastern trips,"
And the sneers of the traveled idiots who duly misgovern the land,
And I prayed to the Lord to deliver another one into my hand.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

How shall she know the worship we would do her?
  The walls are high, and she is very far.
How shall the woman's message reach unto her
  Above the tumult of the packed bazaar?
    Free wind of March, against the lattice blowing,
    Bear thou our thanks, lest she depart unknowing.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Go forth across the fields we may not roam in,
  Go forth beyond the trees that rim the city,
To whatsoe'er fair place she hath her home in,
  Who dowered us with wealth of love and pity.
    Out of our shadow pass, and seek her singing--
    "I have no gifts but Love alone for bringing."

RHYME a b a b c c 

Say that we be a feeble folk who greet her,
  But old in grief, and very wise in tears;
Say that we, being desolate, entreat her
  That she forget us not in after years;
    For we have seen the light, and it were grievous
    To dim that dawning if our lady leave us.

RHYME a b a b c c 

By life that ebbed with none to stanch the failing
  By Love's sad harvest garnered in the spring,
When Love in ignorance wept unavailing
  O'er young buds dead before their blossoming;
    By all the grey owl watched, the pale moon viewed,
    In past grim years, declare our gratitude!

RHYME a b a b c c 

By hands uplifted to the Gods that heard not,
  By fits that found no favor in their sight,
By faces bent above the babe that stirred not,
  By nameless horrors of the stifling night;
    By ills foredone, by peace her toils discover,
    Bid Earth be good beneath and Heaven above her!

RHYME a b a b c c 

If she have sent her servants in our pain
  If she have fought with Death and dulled his sword;
If she have given back our sick again.
  And to the breast the waking lips restored,
    Is it a little thing that she has wrought?
    Then Life and Death and Motherhood be nought.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Go forth, O wind, our message on thy wings,
  And they shall hear thee pass and bid thee speed,
In reed-roofed hut, or white-walled home of kings,
  Who have been helpen by her in their need.
    All spring shall give thee fragrance, and the wheat
    Shall be a tasselled floorcloth to thy feet.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Haste, for our hearts are with thee, take no rest!
  Loud-voiced ambassador, from sea to sea
Proclaim the blessing, manifold, confessed.
  Of those in darkness by her hand set free.
    Then very softly to her presence move,
    And whisper: "Lady, lo, they know and love!"

TITLE

RHYME a b a b *

One moment bid the horses wait,
  Since tiffin is not laid till three,
Below the upward path and straight
  You climbed a year ago with me.
Love came upon us suddenly
  And loosed--an idle hour to kill--
A headless, armless armory
  That smote us both on Jakko Hill.

RHYME a b a b *

Ah Heaven! we would wait and wait
  Through Time and to Eternity!
Ah Heaven! we could conquer Fate
  With more than Godlike constancy
I cut the date upon a tree--
  Here stand the clumsy figures still:
"10-7-85 , A.D."
  Damp with the mist of Jakko Hill.

RHYME a b a b *

What came of high resolve and great,
  And until Death fidelity!
Whose horse is waiting at your gate?
  Whose 'rickshaw-wheels ride over me?
No Saint's, I swear; and--let me see
  Tonight what names your programme fill--
We drift asunder merrily,
  As drifts the mist on Jakko Hill.

RHYME a b a b *

Princess, behold our ancient state
  Has clean departed; and we see
'Twas Idleness we took for Fate
  That bound light bonds on you and me.
Amen! Here ends the comedy
  Where it began in all good will;
Since Love and Leave together flee
  As driven mist on Jakko Hill!

TITLE

RHYME a a b c c b 

    Too late, alas! the song
    To remedy the wrong;--
The rooms are taken from us, swept and  garnished for their fate.
    But these tear-besprinkled pages
    Shall attest to future ages
That we cried against the crime of it--    too late, alas! too late!

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

"What have we ever done to bear this grudge?"
  Was there no room save only in Benmore
For docket, duftar, and for office drudge,
  That you usurp our smoothest dancing floor?
Must babus do their work on polished teak?
  Are ball-rooms fittest for the ink you spill?
Was there no other cheaper house to seek?
  You might have left them all at Strawberry Hill.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

We never harmed you! Innocent our guise,
  Dainty our shining feet, our voices low;
And we revolved to divers melodies,
  And we were happy but a year ago.
Tonight, the moon that watched our lightsome wiles--
  That beamed upon us through the deodars--
Is wan with gazing on official files,
  And desecrating desks disgust the stars.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

Nay! by the memory of tuneful nights--
  Nay! by the witchery of flying feet--
Nay! by the glamour of foredone delights--
  By all things merry, musical, and meet--
By wine that sparkled, and by sparkling eyes--
  By wailing waltz--by reckless galop's strain--
By dim verandas and by soft replies,
  Give us our ravished ball-room back again!

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

Or--hearken to the curse we lay on you!
  The ghosts of waltzes shall perplex your brain,
And murmurs of past merriment pursue
  Your 'wildered clerks that they indite in vain;
And when you count your poor Provincial millions,
  The only figures that your pen shall frame
Shall be the figures of dear, dear cotillions
  Danced out in tumult long before you came.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

Yea! "See Saw" shall upset your estimates,
  "Dream Faces" shall your heavy heads bemuse,
Because your hand, unheeding, desecrates
  Our temple; fit for higher, worthier use.
And all the long verandas, eloquent
  With echoes of a score of Simla years,
Shall plague you with unbidden sentiment--
  Babbling of kisses, laughter, love, and tears.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

So shall you mazed amid old memories stand,
  So shall you toil, and shall accomplish nought,
And ever in your ears a phantom Band
  Shall blare away the staid official thought.
Wherefore--and ere this awful curse he spoken,
  Cast out your swarthy sacrilegious train,
And give--ere dancing cease and hearts be broken--
  Give us our ravished ball-room back again!

TITLE

RHYME a b c b d b 

        That night, when through the mooring-chains
            The wide-eyed corpse rolled free,
          To blunder down by Garden Reach
            And rot at Kedgeree,
          The tale the Hughli told the shoal
            The lean shoal told to me.

RHYME a b c b d b 

'T was Fultah Fisher's boarding-house,
  Where sailor-men reside,
And there were men of all the ports
  From Mississip to Clyde,
And regally they spat and smoked,
  And fearsomely they lied.

RHYME a b c b d b 

They lied about the purple Sea
  That gave them scanty bread,
They lied about the Earth beneath,
  The Heavens overhead,
For they had looked too often on
  Black rum when that was red.

RHYME a b c b d b 

They told their tales of wreck and wrong,
  Of shame and lust and fraud,
They backed their toughest statements with
  The Brimstone of the Lord,
And crackling oaths went to and fro
  Across the fist-banged board.

RHYME a b c b d b 

And there was Hans the blue-eyed Dane,
  Bull-throated, bare of arm,
Who carried on his hairy chest
  The maid Ultruda's charm--
The little silver crucifix
  That keeps a man from harm.

RHYME a b c b d b 

And there was Jake Without-the-Ears,
  And Pamba the Malay,
And Carboy Gin the Guinea cook,
  And Luz from Vigo Bay,
And Honest Jack who sold them slops
  And harvested their pay.

RHYME a b c b d b 

And there was Salem Hardieker,
  A lean Bostonian he--
Russ, German, English, Halfbreed, Finn,
  Yank, Dane, and Portuguee,
At Fultah Fisher's boarding-house
  They rested from the sea.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Now Anne of Austria shared their drinks,
  Collinga knew her fame,
From Tarnau in Galicia
  To Juan Bazaar she came,
To eat the bread of infamy
  And take the wage of shame.

RHYME a b c b d b 

She held a dozen men to heel--
  Rich spoil of war was hers,
In hose and gown and ring and chain,
  From twenty mariners,
And, by Port Law, that week, men called
  her Salem Hardieker's.

RHYME a b c b d b 

But seamen learnt--what landsmen know--
  That neither gifts nor gain
Can hold a winking Light o' Love
  Or Fancy's flight restrain,
When Anne of Austria rolled her eyes
  On Hans the blue-eyed Dane.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Since Life is strife, and strife means knife,
  From Howrah to the Bay,
And he may die before the dawn
  Who liquored out the day,
In Fultah Fisher's boarding-house
  We woo while yet we may.

RHYME a b c b d b 

But cold was Hans the blue-eyed Dane,
  Bull-throated, bare of arm,
And laughter shook the chest beneath
  The maid Ultruda's charm--
The little silver crucifix
  That keeps a man from harm.

RHYME a b c b d b 

"You speak to Salem Hardieker;
  "You was his girl, I know.
"I ship mineselfs tomorrow, see,
  "Und round the Skaw we go,
"South, down the Cattegat, by Hjelm,
  "To Besser in Saro."

RHYME a b c b d b 

When love rejected turns to hate,
  All ill betide the man.
"You speak to Salem Hardieker"--
  She spoke as woman can.
A scream--a sob--"He called me--names!"
  And then the fray began.

RHYME a b c b d b 

An oath from Salem Hardieker,
  A shriek upon the stairs,
A dance of shadows on the wall,
  A knife-thrust unawares--
And Hans came down, as cattle drop,
  Across the broken chairs.

RHYME a b c b d b 

In Anne of Austria's trembling hands
  The weary head fell low:--
"I ship mineselfs tomorrow, straight
  "For Besser in Saro;
"Und there Ultruda comes to me
  "At Easter, und I go--

RHYME a b c b d b 

"South, down the Cattegat--What's here?
  "There--are--no--lights--to guide!"
The mutter ceased, the spirit passed,
  And Anne of Austria cried
In Fultah Fisher's boarding-house
  When Hans the mighty died.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Thus slew they Hans the blue-eyed Dane,
  Bull-throated, bare of arm,
But Anne of Austria looted first
  The maid Ultruda's charm--
The little silver crucifix
  That keeps a man from harm.

TITLE

RHYME a b c b d e f e g g 

So long as 'neath the Kalka hills
  The tonga-horn shall ring,
So long as down the Solon dip
  The hard-held ponies swing,
So long as Tara Devi sees
  The lights of Simla town,
So long as Pleasure calls us up,
  Or Duty drives us down,
    If you love me as I love you
    What pair so happy as we two?

RHYME a b c b d e f e g g 

So long as Aces take the King,
  Or backers take the bet,
So long as debt leads men to wed,
  Or marriage leads to debt,
So long as little luncheons, Love,
  And scandal hold their vogue,
While there is sport at Annandale
  Or whisky at Jutogh,
    If you love me as I love you
    What knife can cut our love in two?

RHYME a b c b d e f e g g 

So long as down the rocking floor
  The raving polka spins,
So long as Kitchen Lancers spur
  The maddened violins,
So long as through the whirling smoke
  We hear the oft-told tale--
"Twelve hundred in the Lotteries,"
  And Whatshername for sale?
    If you love me as I love you
    We'll play the game and win it too.

RHYME a b c b d e f e g g 

So long as Lust or Lucre tempt
  Straight riders from the course,
So long as with each drink we pour
  Black brewage of Remorse,
So long as those unloaded guns
  We keep beside the bed,
Blow off, by obvious accident,
  The lucky owner's head,
    If you love me as I love you
    What can Life kill or Death undo?

RHYME a b c b d e f e g g 

So long as Death 'twixt dance and dance
  Chills best and bravest blood,
And drops the reckless rider down
  The rotten, rain-soaked khud,
So long as rumours from the North
  Make loving wives afraid,
So long as Burma takes the boy
  Or typhoid kills the maid,
    If you love me as I love you
    What knife can cut our love in two?

RHYME a b c b d e f e g g 

By all that lights our daily life
  Or works our lifelong woe,
From Boileaugunge to Simla Downs
  And those grim glades below,
Where, heedless of the flying hoof
  And clamour overhead,
Sleep, with the grey langur for guard
  Our very scornful Dead,
    If you love me as I love you
    All Earth is servant to us two!

RHYME a b c b d e f e g g 

By Docket, Billetdoux, and File,
  By Mountain, Cliff, and Fir,
By Fan and Sword and Office-box,
  By Corset, Plume, and Spur
By Riot, Revel, Waltz, and War,
  By Women, Work, and Bills,
By all the life that fizzes in
  The everlasting Hills,
    If you love me as I love you
    What pair so happy as we two?

TITLE

RHYME a a *

If It be pleasant to look on, stalled in the packed serai,
Does not the Young Man try Its temper and pace ere he buy?
If She be pleasant to look on, what does the Young Man say?
"Lo! She is pleasant to look on, give Her to me today!"

RHYME a a *

Yea, though a Kafir die, to him is remitted Jehannum
If he borrowed in life from a native at sixty per cent. per annum.

RHYME a a *

Blister we not for bursati? So when the heart is vexed,
The pain of one maiden's refusal is drowned in the pain of the next.

RHYME a a *

The temper of chums, the love of your wife, and a new piano's tune--
Which of the three will you trust at the end of an Indian June?

RHYME a a *

Who are the rulers of Ind--to whom shall we bow the knee?
Make your peace with the women, and men will make you L. G.

RHYME a a *

Does the woodpecker flit round the young ferash? Does grass clothe a new-built wall?
Is she under thirty, the woman who holds a boy in her thrall?

RHYME a a *

If She grow suddenly gracious--reflect. Is it all for thee?
The black-buck is stalked through the bullock, and Man through jealousy.

RHYME a a *

Seek not for favor of women. So shall you find it indeed.
Does not the boar break cover just when you're lighting a weed?

RHYME a a *

If He play, being young and unskilful, for shekels of silver and gold,
Take his money, my son, praising Allah. The kid was ordained to be sold.

RHYME a a *

With a "weed" among men or horses verily this is the best,
That you work him in office or dog-cart lightly--but give him no rest.

RHYME a a *

Pleasant the snaffle of Courtship, improving the manners and carriage;
But the colt who is wise will abstain from the terrible thorn-bit of Marriage.

RHYME a a *

As the thriftless gold of the babul, so is the gold that we spend
On a derby Sweep, or our neighbor's wife, or the horse that we buy from a friend.

RHYME a a *

The ways of man with a maid be strange, yet simple and tame
To the ways of a man with a horse, when selling or racing that same.

RHYME a a *

In public Her face turneth to thee, and pleasant Her smile when ye meet.
It is ill. The cold rocks of El-Gidar smile thus on the waves at their feet.

RHYME a a *

In public Her face is averted, with anger. She nameth thy name.
It is well. Was there ever a loser content with the loss of the game?

RHYME a a *

If She have spoken a word, remember thy lips are sealed,
And the Brand of the Dog is upon him by whom is the secret revealed.

RHYME a a *

If She have written a letter, delay not an instant, but burn it.
Tear it to pieces, O Fool, and the wind to her mate shall return it!

RHYME a a *

If there be trouble to Herward, and a lie of the blackest can clear,
Lie, while thy lips can move or a man is alive to hear.

RHYME a a a 

My Son, if a maiden deny thee and scufflingly bid thee give o'er,
Yet lip meets with lip at the last word--get out! She has been there before.
They are pecked on the ear and the chin and the nose who are lacking in lore.

RHYME a a 

If we fall in the race, though we win, the hoof-slide is scarred on the course.
Though Allah and Earth pardon Sin, remaineth forever Remorse.

RHYME a a a 

"By all I am misunderstood!" if the Matron shall say, or the Maid:
"Alas! I do not understand," my son, be thou nowise afraid.
In vain in the sight of the Bird is the net of the Fowler displayed.

RHYME a a a 

My son, if I, Hafiz, the father, take hold of thy knees in my pain,
Demanding thy name on stamped paper, one day or one hour--refrain.
Are the links of thy fetters so light that thou cravest another man's chain?

TITLE

RHYME a b c b d b 

There's a widow in sleepy Chester
  Who weeps for her only son;
There's a grave on the Pabeng River,
  A grave that the Burmans shun,
And there's Subadar Prag Tewarri
  Who tells how the work was done.

RHYME a b c b d b 

A Snider squibbed in the jungle,
  Somebody laughed and fled,
And the men of the First Shikaris
  Picked up their Subaltern dead,
With a big blue mark in his forehead
  And the back blown out of his head.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Subadar Prag Tewarri,
  Jemadar Hira Lal,
Took command of the party,
  Twenty rifles in all,
Marched them down to the river
  As the day was beginning to fall.

RHYME a b c b d b 

They buried the boy by the river,
  A blanket over his face--
They wept for their dead Lieutenant,
  The men of an alien race--
They made a samadh in his honor,
  A mark for his resting-place.

RHYME a b c b d b 

For they swore by the Holy Water,
  They swore by the salt they ate,
That the soul of Lieutenant Eshmitt Sahib
  Should go to his God in state;
With fifty file of Burman
  To open him Heaven's gate.

RHYME a b c b d b 

The men of the First Shikaris
  Marched till the break of day,
Till they came to the rebel village,
  The village of Pabengmay--
A jingal covered the clearing,
  Calthrops hampered the way.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Subadar Prag Tewarri,
  Bidding them load with ball,
Halted a dozen rifles
  Under the village wall;
Sent out a flanking-party
  With Jemadar Hira Lal.

RHYME a b c b d b 

The men of the First Shikaris
  Shouted and smote and slew,
Turning the grinning jingal
  On to the howling crew.
The Jemadar's flanking-party
  Butchered the folk who flew.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Long was the morn of slaughter,
  Long was the list of slain,
Five score heads were taken,
  Five score heads and twain;
And the men of the First Shikaris
  Went back to their grave again,

RHYME a b c b d b 

Each man bearing a basket
  Red as his palms that day,
Red as the blazing village--
  The village of Pabengmay,
And the "drip-drip-drip" from the baskets
  Reddened the grass by the way.

RHYME a b c b d b 

They made a pile of their trophies
  High as a tall man's chin,
Head upon head distorted,
  Set in a sightless grin,
Anger and pain and terror
  Stamped on the smoke-scorched skin.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Subadar Prag Tewarri
  Put the head of the Boh
On the top of the mound of triumph,
  The head of his son below,
With the sword and the peacock-banner
  That the world might behold and know.

RHYME a b c b d b 

Thus the samadh was perfect,
  Thus was the lesson plain
Of the wrath of the First Shikaris--
  The price of a white man slain;
And the men of the First Shikaris
  Went back into camp again.

RHYME a b c b d d b 

Then a silence came to the river,
  A hush fell over the shore,
And Bohs that were brave departed,
  And Sniders squibbed no more;
    For the Burmans said
    That a kullah's head
Must be paid for with heads five score.

RHYME a b c b d b 

There's a widow in sleepy Chester
  Who weeps for her only son;
There's a grave on the Pabeng River,
  A grave that the Burmans shun,
And there's Subadar Prag Tewarri
  Who tells how the work was done.

TITLE

RHYME a b c b *

Beneath the deep veranda's shade,
  When bats begin to fly,
I sit me down and watch--alas!--
  Another evening die.
Blood-red behind the sere ferash
  She rises through the haze.
Sainted Diana! can that be
  The Moon of Other Days?

RHYME a b c b *

Ah! shade of little Kitty Smith,
  Sweet Saint of Kensington!
Say, was it ever thus at Home
  The Moon of August shone,
When arm in arm we wandered long
  Through Putney's evening haze,
And Hammersmith was Heaven beneath
  The Moon of Other Days?

RHYME a b c b *

But Wandle's stream is Sutlej now,
  And Putney's evening haze
The dust that half a hundred kine
  Before my window raise.
Unkempt, unclean, athwart the mist
  The seething city looms,
In place of Putney's golden gorse
  The sickly babul blooms.

RHYME a b c b *

Glare down, old Hecate, through the dust,
  And bid the pie-dog yell,
Draw from the drain its typhoid-germ,
  From each bazaar its smell;
Yea, suck the fever from the tank
  And sap my strength therewith:
Thank Heaven, you show a smiling face
  To little Kitty Smith!

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

In the name of the Empress of India, make way,
  O Lords of the Jungle, wherever you roam.
The woods are astir at the close of the day--
  We exiles are waiting for letters from Home.
Let the robber retreat--let the tiger turn tail--
In the Name of the Empress, the Overland Mail!

RHYME a b a b c c 

With a jingle of bells as the dusk gathers in,
  He turns to the foot-path that heads up the hill--
The bags on his back and a cloth round his chin,
  And, tucked in his waist-belt, the Post Office bill:
"Despatched on this date, as received by the rail,
Per runner, two bags of the Overland Mail."

RHYME a b a b c c 

Is the torrent in spate? He must ford it or swim.
  Has the rain wrecked the road? He must climb by the cliff.
Does the tempest cry "Halt"? What are tempests to him?
  The Service admits not a "but" or and "if."
While the breath's in his mouth, he must bear without fail,
In the Name of the Empress, the Overland Mail.

RHYME a b a b c c 

From aloe to rose-oak, from rose-oak to fir,
  From level to upland, from upland to crest,
From rice-field to rock-ridge, from rock-ridge to spur,
  Fly the soft sandalled feet, strains the brawny brown chest.
From rail to ravine--to the peak from the vale--
Up, up through the night goes the Overland Mail.

RHYME a b a b c c 

There's a speck on the hillside, a dot on the road--
  A jingle of bells on the foot-path below--
There's a scuffle above in the monkey's abode--
  The world is awake, and the clouds are aglow.
For the great Sun himself must attend to the hail:
"In the name of the Empress the Overland Mail!"

TITLE

RHYME a a b b 

By the well, where the bullocks go
Silent and blind and slow--
By the field where the young corn dies
In the face of the sultry skies,

RHYME a b c a b c 

They have heard, as the dull Earth hears
The voice of the wind of an hour,
The sound of the Great Queen's voice:
"My God hath given me years,
Hath granted dominion and power:
And I bid you, O Land, rejoice."

RHYME a b a b 

And the ploughman settles the share
More deep in the grudging clod;
For he saith: "The wheat is my care,
And the rest is the will of God.

RHYME a b a b 

He sent the Mahratta spear
As He sendeth the rain,
And the Mlech, in the fated year,
Broke the spear in twain.

RHYME a b a b 

And was broken in turn. Who knows
How our Lords make strife?
It is good that the young wheat grows,
For the bread is Life."

RHYME a b a a b 

Then, far and near, as the twilight drew,
Hissed up to the scornful dark
Great serpents, blazing, of red and blue,
That rose and faded, and rose anew.
That the Land might wonder and mark

RHYME a b a a b 

"Today is a day of days," they said,
"Make merry, O People, all!"
And the Ploughman listened and bowed his head:
"Today and tomorrow God's will," he said,
As he trimmed the lamps on the wall.

RHYME a b a b 

"He sendeth us years that are good,
As He sendeth the dearth,
He giveth to each man his food,
Or Her food to the Earth.

RHYME a b a b 

Our Kings and our Queens are afar--
On their peoples be peace--
God bringeth the rain to the Bar,
That our cattle increase."

RHYME a b c d c d a b 

And the Ploughman settled the share
More deep in the sun-dried clod:
"Mogul Mahratta, and Mlech from the North,
And White Queen over the Seas--
God raiseth them up and driveth them forth
As the dust of the ploughshare flies in the breeze;
But the wheat and the cattle are all my care,
And the rest is the will of God."

RHYME a a b c c b 

The eldest son bestrides him,
And the pretty daughter rides him,
And I meet him oft o' mornings on the Course;
And there kindles in my bosom
An emotion chill and gruesome
As I canter past the Undertaker's Horse.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Neither shies he nor is restive,
But a hideously suggestive
Trot, professional and placid, he affects;
And the cadence of his hoof-beats
To my mind this grim reproof beats:--
"Mend your pace, my friend, I'm coming. Who's the next?"

RHYME a a b c c b 

Ah! stud-bred of ill-omen,
I have watched the strongest go--men
Of pith and might and muscle--at your heels,
Down the plantain-bordered highway,
(Heaven send it ne'er be my way!)
In a lacquered box and jetty upon wheels.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Answer, sombre beast and dreary,
Where is Brown, the young, the cheery,
Smith, the pride of all his friends and half the Force?
You were at that last dread dak
We must cover at a walk,
Bring them back to me, O Undertaker's Horse!

RHYME a a b c c b 

With your mane unhogged and flowing,
And your curious way of going,
And that businesslike black crimping of your tail,
E'en with Beauty on your back, Sir,
Pacing as a lady's hack, Sir,
What wonder when I meet you I turn pale?

RHYME a a b c c b 

It may be you wait your time, Beast,
Till I write my last bad rhyme, Beast--
Quit the sunlight, cut the rhyming, drop the glass--
Follow after with the others,
Where some dusky heathen smothers
Us with marigolds in lieu of English grass.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Or, perchance, in years to follow,
I shall watch your plump sides hollow,
See Carnifex (gone lame) become a corse--
See old age at last o'erpower you,
And the Station Pack devour you,
I shall chuckle then, O Undertaker's Horse!

RHYME a a b c c b 

But to insult, jibe, and quest, I've
Still the hideously suggestive
Trot that hammers out the unrelenting text,
And I hear it hard behind me
In what place soe'er I find me:--
"'Sure to catch you sooner or later. Who's the next?"

TITLE

RHYME a b c b 

This fell when dinner-time was done--
  'Twixt the first an' the second rub--
That oor mon Jock cam' hame again
  To his rooms ahist the Club.

RHYME a b c b 

An' syne he laughed, an' syne he sang,
  An' syne we thocht him fou,
An' syne he trumped his partner's trick,
  An' garred his partner rue.

RHYME a b c b 

Then up and spake an elder mon,
  That held the Spade its Ace--
"God save the lad! Whence comes the licht
  "That wimples on his face?"

RHYME a b c b 

An' Jock he sniggered, an' Jock he smiled,
  An' ower the card-brim wunk:--
"I'm a' too fresh fra' the stirrup-peg,
  "May be that I am drunk."

RHYME a b c b 

"There's whusky brewed in Galashils
  "An' L. L. L. forbye;
"But never liquor lit the lowe
  "That keeks fra' oot your eye.

RHYME a b c b 

"There's a third o' hair on your dress-coat breast,
  "Aboon the heart a wee?"
"Oh! that is fra' the lang-haired Skye
  "That slobbers ower me."

RHYME a b c b 

"Oh! lang-haired Skyes are lovin' beasts,
  "An' terrier dogs are fair,
"But never yet was terrier born,
  "Wi' ell-lang gowden hair!

RHYME a b c b 

"There's a smirch o' pouther on your breast,
  "Below the left lappel?"
"Oh! that is fra' my auld cigar,
  "Whenas the stump-end fell."

RHYME a b c b 

"Mon Jock, ye smoke the Trichi coarse,
  "For ye are short o' cash,
"An' best Havanas couldna leave
  "Sae white an' pure an ash.

RHYME a b c b 

"This nicht ye stopped a story braid,
  "An' stopped it wi' a curse.
"Last nicht ye told that tale yoursel'--
  "An' capped it wi' a worse!

RHYME a b c b 

"Oh! we're no fou! Oh! we're no fou!
  "But plainly we can ken
"Ye're fallin', fallin' fra the band
  "O' cantie single men!"

RHYME a b c b 

An' it fell when sirris-shaws were sere,
  An' the nichts were lang and mirk,
In braw new breeks, wi' a gowden ring,
  Oor Jock gaed to the Kirk!

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

A great and glorious thing it is
  To learn, for seven years or so,
The Lord knows what of that and this,
  Ere reckoned fit to face the foe--
The flying bullet down the Pass,
That whistles clear: "All flesh is grass."

RHYME a b a b c c 

Three hundred pounds per annum spent
  On making brain and body meeter
For all the murderous intent
  Comprised in "villainous saltpetre!"
And after--ask the Yusufzaies
What comes of all our 'ologies.

RHYME a b a b c c 

A scrimmage in a Border Station--
  A canter down some dark defile--
Two thousand pounds of education
  Drops to a ten-rupee jezail--
The Crammer's boast, the Squadron's pride,
Shot like a rabbit in a ride!

RHYME a b a b c c 

No proposition Euclid wrote,
  No formulae the text-books know,
Will turn the bullet from your coat,
  Or ward the tulwar's downward blow
Strike hard who cares--shoot straight who can--
The odds are on the cheaper man.

RHYME a b a b c c 

One sword-knot stolen from the camp
  Will pay for all the school expenses
Of any Kurrum Valley scamp
  Who knows no word of moods and tenses,
But, being blessed with perfect sight,
Picks off our messmates left and right.

RHYME a b a b c c 

With home-bred hordes the hillsides teem,
  The troop-ships bring us one by one,
At vast expense of time and steam,
  To slay Afridis where they run.
The "captives of our bow and spear"
Are cheap--alas! as we are dear.

TITLE

RHYME a a 

Open the old cigar-box, get me a Cuba stout,
For things are running crossways, and Maggie and I are out.

RHYME a a 

We quarrelled about Havanas--we fought o'er a good cheroot,
And I knew she is exacting, and she says I am a brute.

RHYME a a 

Open the old cigar-box--let me consider a space;
In the soft blue veil of the vapour musing on Maggie's face.

RHYME a a 

Maggie is pretty to look at--Maggie's a loving lass,
But the prettiest cheeks must wrinkle, the truest of loves must pass.

RHYME a a 

There's peace in a Larranaga, there's calm in a Henry Clay;
But the best cigar in an hour is finished and thrown away--

RHYME a a 

Thrown away for another as perfect and ripe and brown--
But I could not throw away Maggie for fear o' the talk o' the town!

RHYME a a 

Maggie, my wife at fifty--grey and dour and old--
With never another Maggie to purchase for love or gold!

RHYME a a 

And the light of Days that have Been the dark of the Days that Are,
And Love's torch stinking and stale, like the butt of a dead cigar--

RHYME a a 

The butt of a dead cigar you are bound to keep in your pocket--
With never a new one to light tho' it's charred and black to the socket!

RHYME a a 

Open the old cigar-box--let me consider a while.
Here is a mild Manila--there is a wifely smile.

RHYME a a 

Which is the better portion--bondage bought with a ring,
Or a harem of dusky beauties, fifty tied in a string?

RHYME a a 

Counsellors cunning and silent--comforters true and tried,
And never a one of the fifty to sneer at a rival bride?

RHYME a a 

Thought in the early morning, solace in time of woes,
Peace in the hush of the twilight, balm ere my eyelids close,

RHYME a a 

This will the fifty give me, asking nought in return,
With only a Suttee's passion--to do their duty and burn.

RHYME a a 

This will the fifty give me. When they are spent and dead,
Five times other fifties shall be my servants instead.

RHYME a a 

The furrows of far-off Java, the isles of the Spanish Main,
When they hear my harem is empty will send me my brides again.

RHYME a a 

I will take no heed to their raiment, nor food for their mouths withal,
So long as the gulls are nesting, so long as the showers fall.

RHYME a a 

I will scent 'em with best vanilla, with tea will I temper their hides,
And the Moor and the Mormon shall envy who read of the tale of my brides.

RHYME a a 

For Maggie has written a letter to give me my choice between
The wee little whimpering Love and the great god Nick o' Teen.

RHYME a a 

And I have been servant of Love for barely a twelvemonth clear,
But I have been Priest of Cabanas a matter of seven year;

RHYME a a 

And the gloom of my bachelor days is flecked with the cheery light
Of stumps that I burned to Friendship and Pleasure and Work and Fight.

RHYME a a 

And I turn my eyes to the future that Maggie and I must prove,
But the only light on the marshes is the Will-o'-the-Wisp of Love.

RHYME a a 

Will it see me safe through my journey or leave me bogged in the mire?
Since a puff of tobacco can cloud it, shall I follow the fitful fire?

RHYME a a 

Open the old cigar-box--let me consider anew--
Old friends, and who is Maggie that I should abandon you?

RHYME a a 

A million surplus Maggies are willing to bear the yoke;
And a woman is only a woman, but a good Cigar is a Smoke.

RHYME a a 

Light me another Cuba--I hold to my first-sworn vows.
If Maggie will have no rival, I'll have no Maggie for Spouse!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Where the sober-colored cultivator smiles
    On his byles;
Where the cholera, the cyclone, and the crow
    Come and go;
Where the merchant deals in indigo and tea,
    Hides and ghi;
Where the Babu drops inflammatory hints
    In his prints;
Stands a City--Charnock chose it--packed away
    Near a Bay--
By the Sewage rendered fetid, by the sewer
    Made impure,
By the Sunderbunds unwholesome, by the swamp
    Moist and damp;
And the City and the Viceroy, as we see,
    Don't agree.

RHYME a a *

Once, two hundred years ago, the trader came
    Meek and tame.

RHYME a a *

Where his timid foot first halted, there he stayed,
    Till mere trade
Grew to Empire, and he sent his armies forth
    South and North
Till the country from Peshawur to Ceylon
    Was his own.

RHYME a a *

Thus the midday halt of Charnock--more's the pity!
    Grew a City.

RHYME a a *

As the fungus sprouts chaotic from its bed,
    So it spread--
Chance-directed, chance-erected, laid and built
    On the silt--
Palace, byre, hovel--poverty and pride--
    Side by side;
And, above the packed and pestilential town,
    Death looked down.

RHYME a a *

But the Rulers in that City by the Sea
    Turned to flee--
Fled, with each returning spring-tide from its ills
    To the Hills.

RHYME a a *

From the clammy fogs of morning, from the blaze
    Of old days,
From the sickness of the noontide, from the heat,
    Beat retreat;
For the country from Peshawur to Ceylon
    Was their own.

RHYME a a *

But the Merchant risked the perils of the Plain
    For his gain.

RHYME a a *

Now the resting-place of Charnock, 'neath the palms,
    Asks an alms,
And the burden of its lamentation is, 
    Briefly, this:
"Because for certain months, we boil and stew,
    So should you.

RHYME a a *

Cast the Viceroy and his Council, to perspire
    In our fire!"
And for answer to the argument, in vain
    We explain
That an amateur Saint Lawrence cannot fry:
    "All must fry!"
That the Merchant risks the perils of the Plain
    For gain.

RHYME a a *

Nor can Rulers rule a house that men grow rich in,
    From its kitchen.

RHYME a a *

Let the Babu drop inflammatory hints
  In his prints;
And mature--consistent soul--his plan for stealing
  To Darjeeling:
Let the Merchant seek, who makes his silver pile,
    England's isle;
Let the City Charnock pitched on--evil day!
    Go Her way.

RHYME a a *

Though the argosies of Asia at Her doors
    Heap their stores,
Though Her enterprise and energy secure
    Income sure,
Though "out-station orders punctually obeyed"
    Swell Her trade--
Still, for rule, administration, and the rest,
    Simla's best.


RHYME a b a b b c c

This is the Month, and this the happy morn
Wherin the Son of Heav'ns eternal King,
Of wedded Maid, and Virgin Mother born,
Our great redemption from above did bring;
For so the holy sages once did sing,
That he our deadly forfeit should release,
And with his Father work us a perpetual peace.

RHYME a b a b b c c

That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable,
And that far-beaming blaze of Majesty,
Wherwith he wont at Heav'ns high Councel-Table,                      
To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
He laid aside; and here with us to be,
Forsook the Courts of everlasting Day,
And chose with us a darksom House of mortal Clay.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Say Heav'nly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein
Afford a present to the Infant God?
Hast thou no vers, no hymn, or solemn strein,
To welcom him to this his new abode,
Now while the Heav'n by the Suns team untrod,
Hath took no print of the approching light,                          
And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?

RHYME a b a b b c c

See how from far upon the Eastern rode
The Star-led Wisards haste with odours sweet,
O run,  prevent them with thy humble ode,
And lay it lowly at his blessed feet;
Have thou the honour first, thy Lord to greet,
And joyn thy voice unto the Angel Quire,
From out his secret Altar toucht with hallow'd fire.

TITLE

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

IT was the Winter wilde,
While the Heav'n-born-childe,                                        
All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies;
Nature in aw to him
Had doff't her gawdy trim,
With her great Master so to sympathize:
It was no season then for her
To wanton with the Sun her lusty Paramour.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

Only with speeches fair
She woo'd the gentle Air
To hide her guilty front with innocent Snow,
And on her naked shame,                                              
Pollute with sinfull blame,
The Saintly Vail of Maiden white to throw,
Confounded, that her Makers eyes
Should look so near upon her foul deformities.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

But he her fears to cease,
Sent down the meek-eyd Peace,
She crown'd with Olive green, came softly sliding
Down through the turning sphear
His ready Harbinger,
With Turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing,                        
And waving wide her mirtle wand,
She strikes a universall Peace through Sea and Land.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

No War, or Battails sound
Was heard the World around,
The idle spear and shield were high up hung;
The hooked Chariot stood
Unstain'd with hostile blood,
The Trumpet spake not to the armed throng,
And Kings sate still with awfull eye,
As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by.                     

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

But peacefull was the night
Wherin the Prince of light
His raign of peace upon the earth began:
The Windes with wonder whist,
Smoothly the waters kist,
Whispering new joyes to the milde Ocean,
Who now hath quite forgot to rave,
While Birds of Calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

The Stars with deep amaze
Stand fit in steadfast gaze,                                         
Bending one way their pretious influence,
And will not take their flight,
For all the morning light,
Or Lucifer that often warned them thence;
But in their glimmering Orbs did glow,
Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

And though the shady gloom
Had given day her room,
The Sun himself with-held his wonted speed,
And hid his head for shame,                                          
As his inferior flame,
The new enlightened world no more should need;
He saw a greater Sun appear
Then his bright Throne, or burning Axletree could bear.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

The Shepherds on the Lawn,
Or ere the point of dawn,
Sate simply chatting in a rustic row;
Full little thought they than,
That the mighty Pan
Was kindly com to live with them below;                              
Perhaps their loves, or els their sheep,
Was all that did their silly thoughts so busie keep.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

When such Musick sweet
Their hearts and ears did greet,
As never was by mortal finger strook,
Divinely-warbled voice
Answering the stringed noise,
As all their souls in blisfull rapture took:
The Air such pleasure loth to lose,
With  thousand echo's still prolongs each heav'nly close.           

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

Nature that heard such  sound
Beneath  the hollow round
of Cynthia's seat the Airy region thrilling,
Now was almost won
To think her part was don
And that her raign had here its last fulfilling;
She knew such harmony alone
Could hold all Heav'n and Earth in happier union.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

At last surrounds their sight
A globe of circular light,                                          
That with long beams the shame faced night arrayed
The helmed Cherubim
And sworded Seraphim,
Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displaid,
Harping in loud and solemn quire,
With unexpressive notes to Heav'ns new-born Heir.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

Such Musick (as 'tis said)
Before was never made,
But when of old the sons of morning sung,
While the Creator Great
His constellations set,                                             
And the well-ballanc't world on hinges hung,
And cast the dark foundations deep,
And bid the weltring waves their oozy channel keep.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

Ring out ye Crystall sphears,
Once bless our human ears,
(If ye have power to touch our senses so)
And let your silver chime
Move in melodious time;
And let the Base of Heav'ns deep Organ blow,                        
And with your ninefold harmony
Make up full consort to th'Angelike symphony.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

For if such holy Song
Enwrap our fancy long,
Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold,
And speckl'd vanity
Will sicken soon and die,
And leprous sin will melt from earthly mould,
And Hell it self will pass away
And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day.                 

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

Yea Truth, and Justice then
Will down return to men,
Th'enameld Arras of the Rain-bow wearing,
And Mercy set between
Thron'd in Celestiall sheen,
With radiant feet the tissued clouds down stearing,
And Heav'n as at som festivall,
Will open wide the gates of her high Palace Hall.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

But wisest Fate sayes  no,
This must not yet be so,                                            
The Babe lies yet in smiling Infancy,
That on the bitter cross
Must redeem our loss;
So both himself and us to glorifie:
Yet first to those ychain'd in sleep,
The Wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep,

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

With such a horrid clang
As on Mount Sinai rang
While the red fire, and smouldring clouds out brake:
The aged Earth agast                                                
With terrour of that blast,
Shall from the surface to the center shake;
When at the worlds last session,
The dreadfull Judge in middle Air shall spread his throne.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

And then at last  our bliss
Full and perfect is,
But now begins; for from this happy day
Th'old Dragon under ground
In straiter limits bound,
Not half so far casts his usurped sway,                             
And wrath to see his Kingdom fail,
Swindges the scaly Horrour of his foulded tail.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

The Oracles are dumm,
No voice or hideous humm
Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving.
Apollo from his shrine
Can no more divine,
With hollow shreik the steep of Delphos leaving.
No nightly trance, or breathed spell,
Inspire's the pale-ey'd Priest from the prophetic cell.             

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

The lonely mountains o're,
And the resounding shore,
A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament;
>From haunted spring, and dale
Edg'd with poplar pale
The parting Genius is with sighing sent,
With flowre-inwov'n tresses torn
The Nimphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

In consecrated Earth,
And on the holy Hearth,                                             
The Lars, and Lemures moan with midnight plaint,
In Urns, and Altars round,
A drear, and dying sound
Affrights the Flamins at their service quaint;
And the chill Marble seems to sweat,
While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

Peor, and Baalim,
Forsake their Temples dim,
With that twise-batter'd god of Palestine,
And mooned Ashtaroth,                                               
Heav'ns Queen and Mother both,
Now sits not girt with Tapers holy shine,
The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn,
In vain the Tyrian Maids their wounded Thamuz mourn.

RHYME a a b c c b d d 

And sullen Moloch fled,
Hath left in shadows dred,
His burning Idol all of blackest hue,
In vain with Cymbals ring,
They call the grisly king,
In dismall dance about the furnace Blue;                            
And Brutish gods of Nile as fast,
lsis and Orus, and the Dog Anubis hast.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b b c c

ERE-while of Musick, and Ethereal mirth,
Wherwith the stage of Ayr and Earth did ring,
And joyous news of heav'nly Infants birth,
My muse with Angels did divide to sing;
But headlong joy is ever on the wing,
In Wintry solstice like the shortn'd light
Soon swallow'd up in dark and long out-living night.

RHYME a b a b b c c

For now to sorrow must I tune my song,
And set my Harpe to notes of saddest wo,
Which on our dearest Lord did sease er'e long,
Dangers, and snares, and wrongs, and worse then so,                  
Which he for us did freely undergo.
Most perfect Heroe, try'd in heaviest plight
Of labours huge and hard, too hard for human wight.

RHYME a b a b b c c

He sov'ran Priest stooping his regall head
That dropt with odorous oil down his fair eyes,
Poor fleshly Tabernacle entered,
His starry front low-rooft beneath the skies;
O what a Mask was there, what a disguise!
Yet more; the stroke of death he must abide,                         
Then lies him meekly down fast by his Brethrens side.

RHYME a b a b b c c

These latter scenes confine my roving vers,
To this Horizon is my Phoebus bound,
His Godlike acts, and his temptations fierce,
And former sufferings other where are found;
Loud o're the rest Cremona's Trump doth sound;
Me softer airs befit, and softer strings
Of Lute, or Viol still, more apt for mournful things.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Befriend me night best Patroness of grief,
Over the Pole thy thickest mantle throw,                             
And work my flatterd fancy to belief,
That Heav'n and Earth are colour'd with my wo;
My sorrows are too dark for day to know:
The leaves should all be black wheron I write,
And letters where my tears have washt a wannish white.

RHYME a b a b b c c

See see the Chariot, and those rushing wheels,
That whirl'd the Prophet up at Chebar flood,
My spirit som transporting Cherub feels,
To bear me where the Towers of Salem stood,
Once glorious Towers, now sunk in guiltles blood;                    
There doth my soul in holy vision sit
In pensive trance, and anguish, and ecstatick fit.

RHYME a b a b b c c

Mine eye hath found that sad Sepulchral rock
That was the Casket of Heav'ns richest store,
And here though grief my feeble hands up-lock,
Yet on the softned Quarry would I score
My plaining vers as lively as before;
For sure so well instructed are my tears,
They would fitly fall in order'd Characters.

RHYME a b a b b c c

I thence hurried on viewles wing,                                    
Take up a weeping on the Mountains wilde,
The gentle neighbourhood of grove and spring
Would soon unboosom all their Echoes milde,
And I (for grief is easily beguild)
Might think th'infection of my sorrows bound,
Had got a race of mourners on som pregnant cloud.

TITLE 

RHYME a a *

THIS rich Marble doth enterr
The honour'd Wife of Winchester,
A Vicounts daughter, an Earls heir,
Besides what her vertues fair
Added to her noble birth,
More then she could own from Earth.
Summers three times eight save one
She had told, alas too soon,
After so short time of breath,
To house with darknes, and with death.                               
Yet had the number of her days
Bin as compleat as was her praise,
Nature and fate had had no strife
In giving limit to her life.
Her high birth, and her graces sweet,
Quickly found a lover meet;
The Virgin quire for her request
The God that sits at marriage feast;
He at their invoking came
But with a scarce-wel-lighted flame;                                 
And in his Garland as he stood,
Ye might discern a Cipress bud.
Once had the early Matrons run
To greet her of a lovely son,
And now with second hope she goes,
And calls Lucina to her throws;
But whether by mischance or blame
Atropos for Lucina came;
And with remorsles cruelty,
Spoil'd at once both fruit and tree:                                 
The haples Babe before his birth
Had burial, yet not laid in earth,
And the languisht Mothers Womb
Was not long a living Tomb.
So have I seen som tender slip
Sav'd with care from Winters nip,
The pride of her carnation train,
Pluck't up by som unheedy swain,
Who onely thought to crop the flowr
New shot up from vernall showr;                                      
But the fair blossom hangs the head
Side-ways as on a dying bed,
And those Pearls of dew she wears,
Prove to be presaging tears
Which the sad morn had let fall
On her hast'ning funerall.
Gentle Lady may thy grave
Peace and quiet ever have;
After this thy travail sore
Sweet rest sease thee evermore,                                      
That to give the world encrease,
Shortned hast thy own lives lease;
Here besides the sorrowing
That thy noble House doth bring,
Here be tears of perfect moan
Weept for thee in Helicon,
And som Flowers, and som Bays,
For thy Hears to strew the ways,
Sent thee from the banks of Came,
Devoted to thy vertuous name;                                        
Whilst thou bright Saint high sit'st in glory,
Next her much like to thee in story,
That fair Syrian Shepherdess,
Who after yeers of barrennes,
The highly favour'd Joseph bore
To him that serv'd for her before,
And at her next birth much like thee,
Through pangs fled to felicity,
Far within the boosom bright
of blazing Majesty and Light,                                        
There with thee, new welcom Saint,
Like fortunes may her soul acquaint,
With thee there clad in radiant sheen,
No Marchioness, but now a Queen.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

WHAT needs my Shakespear for his honour'd Bones,
The labour of an age in piled Stones,
Or that his hallow'd reliques should be hid
Under a Star-ypointing Pyramid?
Dear son of memory, great heir of Fame,
What need'st thou such weak witnes of thy name?
Thou in our wonder and astonishment
Hast built thy self a live-long Monument.
For whilst to th'sharne of slow-endeavouring art,
Thy easie numbers flow, and that each heart                          
Hath from the Leaves of thy unvalu'd Book,
Those Delphick lines with deep impression took,
Then thou our fancy of it self bereaving,
Dost make us Marble with too much conceaving;
And so Sepulcher'd in such pomp dost lie,
That Kings for such a Tomb would wish to die.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

HERE lies old Hobson, Death hath broke his girt,
And here alas, hath laid him in the dirt,
Or els the ways being foul, twenty to one,
He's here stuck in a slough, and overthrown.
'Twas such a shifter, that if truth were known,
Death was half glad when he had got him down;
For he had any time this ten yeers full,
Dodg'd with him, betwixt Cambridge and the Bull.
And surely, Death could never have prevail'd,
Had not his weekly cours of carriage fail'd;                         
But lately finding him so long at home,
And thinking now his journeys end was come,
And that he had tane up his latest Inne,
In the kind office of a Chamberlin
Shew'd him his room where he must lodge that night,
Pull'd off his Boots, and took away the light:
If any ask for him, it shall be sed,
Hobson has supt, and 's newly gon to bed.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

HERE lieth one who did most truly prove,
That he could never die while he could move,
So hung his destiny never to rot
While he might still jogg on, and keep his trot,
Made of sphear-metal, never to decay
Untill his revolution was at stay.
Time numbers motion, yet (without a crime
'Gainst old truth) motion number'd out his time:
And like an Engin mov'd with wheel and waight,
His principles being ceast, he ended strait.                         
Rest that gives all men life, gave him his death,
And too much breathing put him out of breath;
Nor were it contradiction to affirm
Too long vacation hastned on his term.
Meerly to drive the time away he sickn'd,
Fainted, and died, nor would with Ale be quickn'd;
Nay, quoth he, on his swooning bed out-stretch'd,
If I may not carry, sure Ile ne're be fetch'd,
But vow though the cross Doctors all stood hearers,
For one Carrier put down to make six bearers.                        
Ease was his chief disease, and to judge right,
He di'd for heavines that his Cart went light,
His leasure told him that his time was com,
And lack of load, made his life burdensom
That even to his last breath (ther be that say't)
As he were prest to death, he cry'd more waight;
But had his doings lasted as they were,
He had bin an immortall Carrier.
Obedient to the Moon he spent his date
In cours reciprocal, and had his fate                                
Linkt to the mutual flowing of the Seas,
Yet (strange to think) his wain was his increase:
His Letters are deliver'd all and gon,
Onely remains this superscription.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Where brooding darknes spreads his jealous wings,
And the night-Raven sings;
There under Ebon shades and low-brow'd Rocks,
As ragged as thy Locks,
But com thou Goddes fair and free,
In Heav'n ycleap'd Euphrosyne,
And by men, heart-easing Mirth,
Whom lovely Venus at a birth
With two sister Graces more
To Ivy-crowned Bacchus bore;
Or whether (as som Sager sing)
The frolick Wind that breathes the Spring,
Zephir with Aurora playing,
As he met her once a Maying,                                         
There on Beds of Violets blew,
And fresh-blown Roses washt in dew,
Fill'd her with thee a daughter fair,
So bucksom, blith, and debonair.
Haste thee nymph, and bring with thee
Jest and youthful Jollity,
Quips and Cranks, and wanton Wiles,
Nods, and Becks, and Wreathed Smiles,
Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
And love to live in dimple sleek;                                    
Sport that wrincled Care derides,
And Laughter holding both his sides.
Com, and trip it as ye go
On the light fantastick toe,
And in thy right hand lead with thee,
The Mountain Nymph, sweet Liberty;
And if I give thee honour due,
Mirth, admit me of thy crue
To live with her, and live with thee,
In unreproved pleasures free;                                        
To hear the Lark begin his flight,
And singing startle the dull night,
>From his watch-towre in the skies,
Till the dappled dawn doth rise;
Then to com in spight of sorrow,
And at my window bid good morrow,
Through the Sweet-Briar, or the Vine,
Or the twisted Eglantine.
While the Cock with lively din,
Scatters the rear of darknes thin,                                   
And to the stack, or the Barn dore,
Stoutly struts his Dames before,
Oft list'ning how the Hounds and horn
Chearly rouse the slumbring morn,
>From the side of som Hoar Hill,
Through the high wood echoing shrill.
Som time walking not unseen
By Hedge-row Elms, on Hillocks green,
Right against the Eastern gate,
Wher the great Sun begins his state,                                 
Rob'd in flames, and Amber light,
The clouds in thousand Liveries dight.
While the Plowman neer at hand,
Whistles ore the Furrow'd Land,
And the Milkmaid singeth blithe,
And the Mower whets his sithe,
And every Shepherd tells his tale
Under the Hawthorn in the dale.
Streit mine eye hath caught new pleasures
Whilst the Lantskip round it measures,                               
Russet Lawns, and Fallows Gray,
Where the nibling flocks do stray,
Mountains on whose barren brest
The labouring clouds do often rest:
Meadows trim with Daisies pide,
Shallow Brooks, and Rivers wide.
Towers, and Battlements it sees
Boosom'd high in tufted Trees,
Wher perhaps som beauty lies,
The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes.                                   
Hard by, a Cottage chimney smokes,
>From betwixt two aged Okes,
Where Corydon and Thyrsis met,
Are at their savory dinner set
Of Hearbs, and other Country Messes,
Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses;
And then in haste her Bowre she leaves,
With Thestylis to bind the Sheaves;
Or if the earlier season lead
To the tann'd Haycock in the Mead,                                   
Som times with secure delight
The up-land Hamlets will invite,
When the merry Bells ring round,
And the jocond rebecks sound
To many a youth, and many a maid,
Dancing in the Chequer'd shade;
And young and old com forth to play
On a Sunshine Holyday,
Till the live-long day-light fail,
Then to the Spicy Nut-brown Ale,                                    
With stories told of many a feat,
How Faery Mab the junkets eat,
She was pincht, and pull'd she sed,
And he by Friars Lanthorn led
Tells how the drudging Goblin swet,
To ern his Cream-bowle duly set,
When in one night, ere glimps of morn,
His shadowy Flale hath thresh'd the Corn
That ten day-labourers could not end,
Then lies him down the Lubbar Fend.                                 
And stretch'd out all the Chimney's length,
Basks at the fire his hairy strength;
And Crop-full out of dores he flings,
Ere the first Cock his Mattin rings.
Thus don the Tales, to bed they creep,
By whispering Windes soon lull'd asleep.
Towred Cities please us then,
And the busie humm of men,
Where throngs of Knights and Barons bold,
In weeds of Peace high triumphs hold,                               
With store of Ladies, whose bright eies
Rain influence, and judge the prise
Of Wit, or Arms, while both contend
To win her Grace, whom all commend.
There let Hymen oft appear
In Saffron robe, with Taper clear,
And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
With mask, and antique Pageantry,
Such sights as youthfull Poets dream
On Summer eeves by haunted stream.                                  
Then to the well-trod stage anon,
If Jonsons learned Sock be on,
Or sweetest Shakespear fancies childe,
Warble his native Wood-notes wilde,
And ever against eating Cares,
Lap me in soft Lydian Aires,
Married to immortal verse
Such as the meeting soul may pierce
In notes, with many a winding bout
Of lincked sweetnes long drawn out,                                 
With wanton heed, and giddy cunning,
The melting voice through mazes running;
Untwisting all the chains that ty
The hidden soul of harmony.
That Orpheus self may heave his head
From golden slumber on a bed
Of heapt Elysian flowres, and hear
Such streins as would have won the ear
Of Pluto, to have quite set free
His half regain'd Eurydice.                                         

TITLE

RHYME a a *

These delights, if thou canst give,
Mirth with thee, I mean to live.
And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess,
As thick and numberless
As the gay motes that people the Sun Beams,
Or likest hovering dreams
But hail thou Goddess, sage and holy,
Hail divinest Melancholy
Whose Saintly visage is too bright
To hit the Sense of human sight;
And therefore to our weaker view,
Ore laid with black staid Wisdoms hue.
Black, but such as in esteem,
Prince Memnons sister might beseem,
Or that Starr'd Ethiope Queen that strove
To set her beauties praise above                                     
The Sea Nymphs, and their powers offended.
Yet thou art higher far descended,
Thee bright-hair'd Vesta long of yore,
To solitary Saturn bore;
His daughter she (in Saturns raign,
Such mixture was not held a stain)
Oft in glimmering Bowres, and glades
He met her, and in secret shades
Of woody Ida's inmost grove,
While yet there was no fear of Jove.                                 
Com pensive Nun, devout and pure,
Sober, stedfast, and demure,
All in a robe of darkest grain,
Flowing with majestick train,
And sable stole of Cipres Lawn,
Over thy decent shoulders drawn.
Com, but keep thy wonted state,
With eev'n step, and musing gate,
And looks commercing with the skies,
Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes:                                 
There held in holy passion still,
Forget thy self to Marble, till
With a sad Leaden downward cast,
Thou fix them on the earth as fast.
And joyn with thee calm Peace, and Quiet,
Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet,
And hears the Muses in a ring,
Ay round about Joves Altar sing.
And adde to these retired Leasure,
That in trim Gardens takes his pleasure;                             
But first, and chiefest, with thee bring,
Him that yon soars on golden wing,
Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne,
The Cherub Contemplation,
And the mute Silence hist along,
'Less Philomel will daign a Song,
In her sweetest, saddest plight,
Smoothing the rugged brow of night,
While Cynthia checks her Dragon yoke,
Gently o're th'accustom'd Oke;                                       
Sweet Bird that shunn'st the noise of folly
Most musical!, most melancholy!
Thee Chauntress oft the Woods among
I woo to hear thy eeven-Song;
And missing thee, I walk unseen
On the dry smooth-shaven Green,
To behold the wandring Moon,
Riding neer her highest noon,
Like one that had bin led astray
Through the Heav'ns wide pathles way;                                
And oft, as if her head she bow'd,
Stooping through a fleecy cloud.
Oft on a Plat of rising ground,
I hear the far-off Curfeu sound,
Over som wide-water'd shoar,
Swinging slow with sullen roar;
Or if the Ayr will not permit,
Som still removed place will fit,
Where glowing Embers through the room
Teach light to counterfeit a gloom                                   
Far from all resort of mirth,
Save the Cricket on the hearth,
Or the Belmans drowsie charm,
To bless the dores from nightly harm:
Or let my Lamp at midnight hour,
Be seen in som high lonely Towr,
Where I may oft out-watch the Bear,
With thrice great Hermes, or unsphear
The spirit of Plato to unfold
What Worlds, or what vast Regions hold                               
The immortal mind that hath forsook
Her mansion in this fleshly nook:
And of those Daemons that are found
In fire, air, flood, or under ground,
Whose power hath a true consent
With planet or with Element.
Som time let Gorgeous Tragedy
In Scepter'd Pall com sweeping by,
Presenting Thebs, or Pelops line,
Or the tale of Troy divine.                                         
Or what (though rare) of later age,
Ennobled hath the Buskind stage.
But, O sad Virgin, that thy power
Might raise Musaeus from his bower,
Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing
Such notes as warbled to the string,
Drew Iron tears down Pluto's cheek,
And made Hell grant what Love did seek.
Or call up him that left half told
The story of Cambuscan bold,                                        
Of Camball, and of Algarsife,
And who had Canace to wife,
That own'd the vertuous Ring and Glass,
And of the wondrous Hors of Brass,
On which the Tartar King did ride;
And if ought els, great Bards beside,
In sage and solemn tunes have sung,
Of Turneys and of Trophies hung;
Of Forests, and inchantments drear,
Where more is meant then meets the ear.                             
Thus night oft see me in thy pale career,
Till civil-suited Morn appeer,
Not trickt and frounc't as she was wont,
With the Attick Boy to hunt,
But Cherchef't in a comly Cloud,
While rocking Winds are Piping loud,
Or usher'd with a shower still,
When the gust hath blown his fill,
Ending on the russling Leaves,
With minute drops from off the Eaves.                               
And when the Sun begins to fling
His flaring beams, me Goddes bring
To arched walks of twilight groves,
And shadows brown that Sylvan loves
Of Pine, or monumental Oake,
Where the rude Ax with heaved stroke,
Was never heard the Nymphs to daunt,
Or fright them from their hallow'd haunt.
There in close covert by som Brook,
Where no profaner eye may look,                                     
Hide me from Day's garish eie,
While the Bee with Honied thie,
That at her flowry work doth sing,
And the Waters murmuring
With such consort as they keep,
Entice the dewy-feather'd Sleep;
And let som strange mysterious dream,
Wave at his Wings in Airy stream,
Of lively portrature display'd,
Softly on my eye-lids laid.                                         
And as I wake, sweet musick breath
Above, about, or underneath,
Sent by som spirit to mortals good,
Or th'unseen Genius of the Wood.
But let my due feet never fail,
To walk the studious Cloysters pale,
And love the high embowed Roof
With antick Pillars massy proof,
And storied Windows richly dight,
Casting a dimm religious light.                                     
There let the pealing Organ blow,
To the full voic'd Quire below,
In Service high, and Anthems cleer,
As may with sweetnes, through mine ear,
Dissolve me into extasies,
And bring all Heav'n before mine eyes.
And may at last my weary age
Find out the peacefull hermitage,
The Hairy Gown and Mossy Cell,
Where I may sit and rightly spell                                   
Of every Star that Heav'n doth shew,
And every Herb that sips the dew;
Till old  experience do attain
To somthing like prophetic strain.
These pleasures Melancholy give,
And I with thee will choose to live.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

GEN. Stay gentle Swains, for though in this disguise,
I see bright honour sparkle through your eyes,
Of famous Arcady ye are, and sprung
Of that renowned flood, so often sung,
Divine Alpheus, who by secret sluse,                                 
Stole under Seas to meet his Arethuse;
And ye the breathing Roses of the Wood,
Fair silver-buskind Nymphs as great and good,
I know this quest of yours, and free intent
Was all in honour and devotion ment
To the great Mistres of yon princely shrine,
Whom with low reverence I adore as mine,
And with all helpful service will comply
To further this nights glad solemnity;
And lead ye where ye may more neer behold                            
What shallow-searching Fame hath left untold;
Which I full oft amidst these shades alone
Have sate to wonder at, and gaze upon:
For know by lot from Jove I am the powr
Of this fair wood, and live in Oak'n bowr,
To nurse the Saplings tall, and curl the grove
With Ringlets quaint, and wanton windings wove.
And all my Plants I save from nightly ill,
Of noisom winds, and blasting vapours chill.
And from the Boughs brush off the evil dew,                          
And heal the harms of thwarting thunder blew,
Or what the cross dire-looking Planet smites,
Or hurtfull Worm with canker'd venom bites.
When Eev'ning gray doth rise, I fetch my round
Over the mount, and all this hallow'd ground,
And early ere the odorous breath of morn
Awakes the slumbring leaves, or tasseld horn
Shakes the high thicket, haste I all about,
Number my ranks, and visit every sprout
With puissant words, and murmurs made to bless,                      
But els in deep of night when drowsines
Hath lockt up mortal sense, then listen I
To the celestial Sirens harmony,
That sit upon the nine enfolded Sphears,
And sing to those that hold the vital shears,
And turn the Adamantine spindle round,
On which the fate of gods and men is wound.
Such sweet compulsion doth in musick ly,
To lull the daughters of Necessity,
And keep unsteddy Nature to her law,                                 
And the low world in measur'd motion draw
After the heavenly tune, which none can hear
Of human mould with grosse unpurged ear;
And yet such musick worthiest were to blaze
The peerles height of her immortal praise,
Whose lustre leads us, and for her most fit,
If my inferior hand or voice could hit
Inimitable sounds, yet as we go,
What ere the skill of lesser gods can show,
I will assay, her worth to celebrate,                                
And so attend ye toward her glittering state;
Where ye may all that are of noble stemm
Approach, and kiss her sacred vestures hemm.

RHYME a a *

O're the smooth enameld green
Where no print of step hath been,
Follow me as I sing,
And touch the warbled string.
Under the shady roof
Of branching Elm Star-proof,
Follow me,                                                           
I will bring you where she sits
Clad in splendor as befits
Her deity.
Such a rural Queen
All Arcadia hath not seen.

RHYME a a *

Nymphs and Shepherds dance no more
By sandy Ladons Lillied banks.
On old Lycaeus or Cyllene hoar,
Trip no more in twilight ranks,
Though Erynanth your loss deplore,                                  
A better soyl shall give ye thanks.
>From the stony Maenalus,
Bring your Flocks, and live with us,
Here ye shall have greater grace,
To serve the Lady of this place.
Though Syrinx your Pans Mistres were,
Yet Syrinx well might wait on her.
Such a rural Queen
All Arcadia hath not seen.

RHYME a a *

Listen and appear to us
In name of great Oceanus,
By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace,
And Tethys grave majestick pace,                                    
By hoary Nereus wrincled look,
And the Carpathian wisards hook,
By scaly Tritons winding shell,
And old sooth-saying Glaucus spell,
By Leucothea's lovely hands,
And her son that rules the strands,
By Thetis tinsel-slipper'd feet,
And the Songs of Sirens sweet,
By dead Parthenope's dear tomb,
And fair Ligea's golden comb,                                       
Wherwith she sits on diamond rocks
Sleeking her soft alluring locks,
By all the Nymphs that nightly dance
Upon thy streams with wily glance,
Rise, rise, and heave thy rosie head
>From thy coral-pav'n bed,
And bridle in thy headlong wave,
Till thou our summons answered have.

RHYME a a b c c b

Sab: By the rushy-fringed bank,                                     
Where grows the Willow and the Osier dank,
My sliding Chariot stayes,
Thick set with Agat, and the azurn sheen
Of Turkis blew, and Emrauld green
That in the channell strayes,

RHYME a a *

Whilst from off the waters fleet
Thus I set my printless feet
O're the Cowslips Velvet head,
That bends not as I tread,
Com Lady while Heaven lends us grace,
Let us fly this cursed place,
Lest the Sorcerer us intice                                         
With som other new device.
Not a waste, or needless sound
Till we com to holier ground,
I shall be your faithfull guide
Through this gloomy covert wide,
And not many furlongs thence
Is your Fathers residence,
Where this night are met in state
Many a friend to gratulate
His wish't presence, and beside                                     
All the Swains that there abide,
With Jiggs, and rural dance resort,
We shall catch them at their sport,
And our sudden coming there
Will double all their mirth and chere;
Com let us haste, the Stars grow high,
But night sits monarch yet in the mid sky.

RHYME a a *

Spir: Back Shepherds, back, anough your play,
Till next Sun-shine holiday,
Here be without duck or nod                                         
Other trippings to be trod
Of lighter toes, and such Court guise
As Mercury did first devise
With the mincing Dryades
On the Lawns, and on the Leas.

RHYME a a *

Noble Lord, and Lady bright,
I have brought ye new delight,
Here behold so goodly grown
Three fair branches of your own,
Heav'n hath timely tri'd their youth.                               
Their faith, their patience, and their truth
And sent them here through hard assays
With a crown of deathless Praise,
To triumph in victorious dance
O're sensual folly, and Intemperance.

RHYME a a *

Spir: To the Ocean now I fly,
And those happy climes that ly
Where day never shuts his eye,
Up in the broad fields of the sky:
There I suck the liquid ayr                                         
All amidst the Gardens fair
Of Hesperus, and his daughters three
That sing about the golden tree:
Iris there with humid bow,
Waters the odorous banks that blow
Flowers of more mingled hew
Then her purfl'd scarf can shew,
And drenches with Elysian dew
(List mortals, if your ears be true)
Beds of Hyacinth, and roses
Where young Adonis oft reposes,
Waxing well of his deep wound                                      
In slumber soft, and on the ground
Sadly sits th' Assyrian Queen;
But far above in spangled sheen
Celestial Cupid her fam'd son advanc't,
Holds his dear Psyche sweet intranc't
After her wandring labours long,
Till free consent the gods among
Make her his eternal Bride,
And from her fair unspotted side
Two blissful twins are to be born,
Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn.                                 

RHYME a a *

But now my task is smoothly don,
I can fly, or I can run
Quickly to the green earths end,
Where the bow'd welkin slow doth bend,
And from thence can soar as soon
To the corners of the Moon.
Mortals that would follow me,
Love vertue, she alone is free,
She can teach ye how to clime                                      
Higher then the Spheary chime;
Or if Vertue feeble were,
Heav'n it self would stoop to her.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

HAIL native Language, that by sinews weak
Didst move my first endeavouring tongue to speak,
And mad'st imperfect words with childish tripps,
Half unpronounc't, slide through my infant-lipps,
Driving dum silence from the portal dore,
Where he had mutely sate two years before:
Here I salute thee and thy pardon ask,
That now I use thee in my latter task:
Small loss it is that thence can come unto thee,
I know my tongue but little Grace can do thee:                       
Thou needst not be ambitious to be first,
Believe me I have thither packt the worst:
And, if it happen as I did forecast,
The daintest dishes shall be serv'd up last.
I pray thee then deny me not thy aide
For this same small neglect that I have made:
But haste thee strait to do me once a Pleasure,
And from thy wardrope bring thy chiefest treasure;
Not those new fangled toys, and triming slight
Which takes our late fantasticks with delight,                       
But cull those richest Robes, and gay'st attire
Which deepest Spirits, and choicest Wits desire:
I have some naked thoughts that rove about
And loudly knock to have their passage out;
And wearie of their place do only stay
Till thou hast deck't them in thy best aray;
That so they may without suspect or fears
Fly swiftly to this fair Assembly's ears;
Yet I had rather if I were to chuse,
Thy service in some graver subject use,                              
Such as may make thee search thy coffers round
Before thou cloath my fancy in fit sound:
Such where the deep transported mind may scare
Above the wheeling poles, and at Heav'ns dore
Look in, and see each blissful Deitie
How he before the thunderous throne doth lie,
Listening to what unshorn Apollo sings
To th'touch of golden wires, while Hebe brings
Immortal Nectar to her Kingly Sire:
Then passing through the Spherse of watchful fire,                   
And mistie Regions of wide air next under,
And hills of Snow and lofts of piled Thunder,
May tell at length how green-ey'd Neptune raves,
In Heav'ns defiance mustering all his waves;
Then sing of secret things that came to pass
When Beldam Nature in her cradle was;
And last of Kings and Queens and Hero's old,
Such as the wise Demodocus once told
In solemn Songs at King Alcinous feast,
While sad Ulisses soul and all the rest                              
Are held with his melodious harmonie
In willing chains and sweet captivitie.
But fie my wandring Muse how thou dost stray !
Expectance calls thee now another way,
Thou know'st it must he now thy only bent
To keep in compass of thy Predicament:
Then quick about thy purpos'd business come,
That to the next I may resign my Roome
Good luck befriend thee Son; for at thy birth
The Faiery Ladies daunc't upon the hearth;                           
Thy drowsie Nurse hath sworn she did them spie
Come tripping to the Room where thou didst lie;
And sweetly singing round about thy Bed
Strew all their blessings on thy sleeping Head.
She heard them give thee this, that thou should'st still
From eyes of mortals walk invisible,
Yet there is something that doth force my fear,
For once it was my dismal hap to hear
A Sybil old, bow-bent with crooked age,
That far events full wisely could presage,
And in Times long and dark Prospective Glass
Fore-saw what future dayes should bring to pass,
Your Son, said she, (nor can you it prevent)
Shall subject be to many an Accident.
O're all his Brethren he shall Reign as King,
Yet every one shall make him underling,
And those that cannot live from him asunder
Ungratefully shall strive to keep him under,
In worth and excellence he shall out-go them,
Yet being above them, he shall be below them;                        
From others he shall stand in need of nothing,
Yet on his Brothers shall depend for Cloathing.
To find a Foe it shall not be his hap,
And peace shall lull him in her flowry lap;
Yet shall he live in strife, and at his dore
Devouring war shall never cease to roare;
Yea it shall be his natural property
To harbour those that are at enmity.
What power, what force, what mighty spell, if not
Your learned hands, can loose this Gordian knot?                     
Rivers arise; whether thou be the Son,
Of utmost Tweed, or Oose, or gulphie Dun,
Or Trent, who like some earth-born Giant spreads
His thirty Armes along the indented Meads,
Or sullen Mole that runneth underneath,
Or Severn swift, guilty of Maidens death,
Or Rockie Avon, or of Sedgie Lee,
Or Coaly Tine, or antient hallowed Dee,
Or Humber loud that keeps the Scythians Name,
Or Medway smooth, or Royal Towred Thame.                           

TITLE 

RHYME a a *

BLESS'D is the man who hath not walk'd astray
In counsel of the wicked, and ith'way
Of sinners hath not stood, and in the seat
Of scorners hath not sate.  But in the great
Jehovahs Law is ever his delight,
And in his law he studies day and night.
He shall be as a tree which planted grows
By watry streams, and in his season knows
To yield his fruit, and his leaf shall not fall.
And what he takes in hand shall prosper all.                         
Not so the wicked, but as chaff which fann'd
The wind drives, so the wicked shall not stand
In judgment, or abide their tryal then
Nor sinners in th'assembly of just men.
For the Lord knows th'upright way of the just
And the way of bad men to ruine must.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

O JEHOVAH our Lord how wondrous great
And glorious is thy name through all the earth?
So as above the Heavens thy praise to set
Out of the tender mouths of latest bearth,

RHYME a b a b

Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou
Hast founded strength because of all thy foes
To stint th'enemy, and slack th'avengers brow
That bends his rage thy providence to oppose.

RHYME a b a b

When I behold thy Heavens, thy Fingers art,
The Moon and Starrs which thou so bright hast set,                   
In the pure firmament, then saith my heart,
O What is man that thou remembrest yet,

RHYME a b a b

And think'st upon him; or of man begot
That him thou visit'st and of him art found;
Scarce to be less then Gods, thou mad'st his lot,
With honour and with state thou hast him crown'd.

RHYME a b a b

O're the works of thy hand thou mad'st him Lord,
Thou hast put all under his lordly feet,
All Flocks, and Herds, by thy commanding word,
All beasts that in the field or forrest meet.                        

RHYME a b a b

Fowl of the Heavens, and Fish that through the wet
Sea-paths in shoals do slide. And know no dearth.
O Jehovah our Lord how wondrous great
And glorious is thy name through all the earth.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b c d c d

   THOU Shepherd that dost Israel keep
    Give ear in time of need,				
    Who leadest like a flock of sheep
    Thy loved Josephs seed,
    That sitt'st between the Cherubs bright
    Between their wings out-spread
    Shine forth, and from thy cloud give light,
    And on our foes thy dread.

RHYME a b a b

   In Ephraims view and Benjamins,
    And in Manasse's sight                              
    Awake* thy strength, come, and be seen              
    To save us by thy might.

RHYME a b a b

   Turn us again, thy grace divine
    To us O God vouchsafe;
    Cause thou thy face on us to shine
    And then we shall be safe.

RHYME a b a b

   Lord God of Hosts, how long wilt thou,
    How long wilt thou declare
    Thy *smoaking wrath, and angry brow                 
    Against thy peoples praire.                         

RHYME a b a b

   Thou feed'st them with the bread of tears,
    Their bread with tears they eat,
    And mak'st them* largely drink the tears            
    Wherewith their cheeks are wet.

RHYME a b a b

   A strife thou mak'st us and a prey
    To every neighbour foe,
    Among themselves they *laugh, they *play,           
    And *flouts at us they throw.

RHYME a b a b

   Return us, and thy grace divine,
    O God of Hosts vouchsafe                            
    Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
    And then we shall be safe.

RHYME a b a b

   A Vine from Aegypt thou hast brought,
    Thy free love made it thine,
    And drov'st out Nations proud and haut
    To plant this lovely Vine.

RHYME a b a b

   Thou did'st prepare for it a place
    And root it deep and fast
    That it began to grow apace,
    And fill'd the land at last.                        

RHYME a b a b

  With her green shade that cover'd all,
    The Hills were over-spread
    Her Bows as high as Cedars tall
    Advanc'd their lofty head.

RHYME a b a b

  Her branches on the western side
    Down to the Sea she sent,
    And upward to that river wide
    Her other branches went.

RHYME a b a b

  Why hast thou laid her Hedges low
    And brok'n down her Fence,                          
    That all may pluck her, as they go,
    With rudest violence?

RHYME a b a b

  The tusked Boar out of the wood
    Up turns it by the roots,
    Wild Beasts there brouze, and make their food
    Her Grapes and tender Shoots.

RHYME a b a b

  Return now, God of Hosts, look down
    From Heav'n, thy Seat divine,
    Behold us, but without a frown,
    And visit this thy Vine.           
                 
RHYME a b a b

  Visit this Vine, which thy right hand
    Hath set, and planted long,
    And the young branch, that for thy self
    Thou hast made firm and strong.

RHYME a b a b

  But now it is consum'd with fire,
    And cut with Axes down,
    They perish at thy dreadfull ire,
    At thy rebuke and frown.

RHYME a b a b

  Upon the man of thy right hand
    Let thy good hand be laid,                          
    Upon the Son of Man, whom thou
    Strong for thyself hast made.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

  So shall we not go back from thee
    To wayes of sin and shame,
    Quick'n us thou, then gladly wee
    Shall call upon thy Name.
    Return us, and thy grace divine
    Lord God of Hosts voutsafe,
    Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
    And then we shall be safe.                          

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   To God our strength sing loud, and clear,
    Sing loud to God our King,
    To Jacobs God, that all may hear
    Loud acclamations ring.

RHYME a b a b

   Prepare a Hymn, prepare a Song
    The Timbrel hither bring
    The cheerfull Psaltry bring along
    And Harp with pleasant string.

RHYME a b a b

   Blow, as is wont, in the new Moon
    With Trumpets lofty sound,                          
    Th'appointed time, the day wheron
    Our solemn Feast comes round.

RHYME a b a b

   This was a Statute giv'n of old
    For Israel to observe
    A Law of Jacobs God, to hold
    From whence they might not swerve.

RHYME a b a b

   This he a Testimony ordain'd
    In Joseph, not to change,
    When as he pass'd through Aegypt land;
    The Tongue I heard, was strange.                    

RHYME a b a b

   From burden, and from slavish toyle
    I set his shoulder free;
    His hands from pots, and mirie soyle
    Deliver'd were by me.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

   When trouble did thee sore assaile,
    On me then didst thou call,
    And I to free thee did not faile,
    And led thee out of thrall.
    I answer'd thee in *thunder deep                 
    With clouds encompass'd round;                      
    I tri'd thee at the water steep
    Of Meriba renown'd.

RHYME a b a b

   Hear O my people, heark'n well,
    I testifie to thee
    Thou antient flock of Israel,
    If thou wilt list to mee,

RHYME a b a b

   Through out the land of thy abode
    No alien God shall be
    Nor shalt thou to a forein God
    In honour bend thy knee.                            

RHYME a b a b

  I am the Lord thy God which brought
    Thee out of Aegypt land
    Ask large enough, and I, besought,
    Will grant thy full demand.

RHYME a b a b

  And yet my people would not hear,
    Nor hearken to my voice;
    And Israel whom I lov'd so dear
    Mislik'd me for his choice.

RHYME a b a b

  Then did I leave them to their will
    And to their wandring mind;                         
    Their own conceits they follow'd still
    Their own devises blind

RHYME a b a b

  O that my people would be wise
    To serve me all their daies,
    And O that Israel would advise
    To walk my righteous waies.

RHYME a b a b

  Then would I soon bring down their foes
    That now so proudly rise,
    And turn my hand against all those
    That are their enemies.                                          

RHYME a b a b

  Who hate the Lord should then be fain
    To bow to him and bend,
    But they, His should remain,
    Their time should have no end.

RHYME a b a b

  And he would free them from the shock
    With flower of finest wheat,
    And satisfie them from the rock
    With Honey for their Meat.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   GOD in the *great *assembly stands          
    Of Kings and lordly States,
    Among the gods* on both his hands.          
    He judges and debates.

RHYME a b a b

   How long will ye *pervert the right         
    With *judgment false and wrong              
    Favouring the wicked by your might,
    Who thence grow bold and strong?

RHYME a b a b

  *Regard the *weak and fatherless             
   *Dispatch the *poor mans cause,              
    And **raise the man in deep distress
    By **just and equal Lawes.                  

RHYME a b a b

   Defend the poor and desolate,
    And rescue from the hands
    Of wicked men the low estate
    Of him that help demands.

RHYME a b a b

   They know not nor will understand,
    In darkness they walk on,
    The Earths foundations all are *mov'd       
    And *out of order gon.                      

RHYME a b a b

   I said that ye were Gods, yea all
    The Sons of God most high
   But ye shall die like men, and fall
    As other Princes die.

RHYME a b a b

   Rise God, *judge thou the earth in might,
    This wicked earth *redress,                 
    For thou art he who shalt by right
    The Nations all possess.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   BE not thou silent now at length
    O God hold not thy peace,
    Sit not thou still O God of strength
    We cry and do not cease.

RHYME a b a b

   For lo thy furious foes now *swell
    And *storm outrageously,                    
    And they that hate thee proud and fill
    Exalt their heads full hie.

RHYME a b a b

   Against thy people they *contrive           
   *Their Plots and Counsels deep,              
   *Them to ensnare they chiefly strive         
   *Whom thou dost hide and keep.               

RHYME a b a b

   Come let us cut them off say they,
    Till they no Nation be
    That Israels name for ever may
    Be lost in memory.

RHYME a b a b

   For they consult *with all their might,     
    And all as one in mind
    Themselves against thee they unite
    And in firm union bind.                     

RHYME a b a b

   The tents of Edom, and the brood
    Of scornful Ishmael,
    Moab, with them of Hagars blood
    That in the Desart dwell,

RHYME a b a b

   Gebal and Ammon there conspire,
    And hateful Amalec,
    The Philistims, and they of Tyre
    Whose bounds the sea doth check.

RHYME a b a b

   With them great Asshur also bands
    And doth confirm the knot,                  
    All these have lent their armed hands
    To aid the Sons of Lot.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b a b a b

   Do to them as to Midian bold
    That wasted all the Coast.
    To Sisera, and as is told
    Thou didst to Jabins hoast,
    When at the brook of Kishon old
    They were repulst and slain,
  At Endor quite cut off, and rowl'd
    As dung upon the plain.                     

RHYME a b a b

  As Zeb and Oreb evil sped
    So let their Princes speed
    As Zeba, and Zalmunna bled
    So let their Princes bleed.

RHYME a b a b

  For they amidst their pride have said
    By right now shall we seize
    Gods houses, and will now invade
    Their stately Palaces.                    

RHYME a b a b

  My God, oh make them as a wheel
    No quiet let them find,                     
    Giddy and restless let them reel
    Like stubble from the wind.

RHYME a b a b

  As when an aged wood takes fire
    Which on a sudden straies,
    The greedy flame runs hier and hier
    Till all the mountains blaze,

RHYME a b a b

  So with thy whirlwind them pursue,
    And with thy tempest chase;
 *And till they *yield thee honour due,       
    Lord fill with shame their face.            

RHYME a b a b

  Asham'd and troubl'd let them be,           
    Troubl'd and sham'd for ever,
    Ever confounded, and so die
    With shame, and scape it never.

RHYME a b a b

  Then shall they know that thou whose name
    Jehova is alone,
    Art the most high, and thou the same
    O're all the earth art one.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   How lovely are thy dwellings fair!
    O Lord of Hoasts, how dear
    The pleasant Tabernacles are!
    Where thou do'st dwell so near.

RHYME a b a b

   My Soul doth long and almost die
    Thy Courts O Lord to see,
    My heart and flesh aloud do crie,
    O living God, for thee.

RHYME a b a b

   There ev'n the Sparrow freed from wrong
    Hath found a house of rest,                 
    The Swallow there, to lay her young
    Hath built her brooding nest,

RHYME a b a b

    Ev'n by thy Altars Lord of Hoasts
    They find their safe abode,
    And home they fly from round the Coasts
    Toward thee, My King, my God

RHYME a b a b

   Happy, who in thy house reside
    Where thee they ever praise,
   Happy, whose strength in thee doth bide,
    And in their hearts thy waies.              

RHYME a b a b

   They pass through Baca's thirstie Vale,
    That dry and barren ground
    As through a fruitfull watry Dale
    Where Springs and Showrs abound.

RHYME a b a b

   They journey on from strength to strength
    With joy and gladsom cheer
    Till all before our God at length
    In Sion do appear.

RHYME a b a b

   Lord God of Hoasts hear now my praier
    O Jacobs God give ear,                      
   Thou God our shield look on the face
    Of thy anointed dear.

RHYME a b a b

  For one day in thy Courts to be
    Is better, and mere blest
    Then in the joyes of Vanity,
    A thousand daies at best.

RHYME a b a b

    I in the temple of my God
    Had rather keep a dore,
    Then dwell in Tents, and rich abode
    With Sin for evermore                       

RHYME a b a b

  For God the Lord both Sun and Shield
    Gives grace and glory bright,
    No good from him shall be with-held
    Whose waies are just and right.

RHYME a b a b

  Lord God of Hoasts that raign 'st on high,
    That man is truly blest
    Who only on thee doth relie.
    And in thee only rest.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   THY Land to favour graciously
    Thou hast not Lord been slack,
    Thou hast from hard Captivity
    Returned Jacob back.

RHYME a b a b

   Th' iniquity thou didst forgive
    That wrought thy people woe,
    And all their Sin, that did thee grieve
    Hast hid where none shall know.

RHYME a b a b

   Thine anger all thou hadst remov'd,
    And calmly didst return                     
    From thy *fierce wrath which we had prov'd  
    Far worse then fire to burn.                

RHYME a b a b

   God of our saving health and peace,         
    Turn us, and us restore,
    Thine indignation cause to cease
    Toward us, and chide no more.

RHYME a b a b

   Wilt thou be angry without end,
    For ever angry thus
    Wilt thou thy frowning ire extend
    From age to age on us?                      

RHYME a b a b

   Wilt thou not * turn, and hear our voice    
    And us again * revive ,                     
    That so thy people may rejoyce
    By thee preserv'd alive.

RHYME a b a b

   Cause us to see thy goodness Lord,
    To us thy mercy shew
    Thy saving health to us afford
    And lift in us renew.

RHYME a b a b

   And now what God the Lord will speak
    I will go strait and hear,                  
    For to his people he speaks peace
    And to his Saints full dear,
 
RHYME a b a b

   To his dear Saints he will speak peace,
    But let them never more
    Return to folly, but surcease
    To trespass as before.

RHYME a b a b

   Surely to such as do him fear
    Salvation is at hand
    And glory shall ere long appear
    To dwell within our Land.                   

RHYME a b a b

  Mercy and Truth that long were miss'd
    Now joyfully are met
    Sweet Peace and Righteousness have kiss'd
    And hand in hand are set.

RHYME a b a b

  Truth from the earth like to a flowr
    Shall bud and blossom then,
    And Justice from her heavenly bowr
    Look down on mortal men.

RHYME a b a b

  The Lord will also then bestow
    Whatever thing is good                      
    Our Land shall forth in plenty throw
    Her fruits to be our food.

RHYME a b a b

  Before him Righteousness shall go
    His Royal Harbinger,
    Then * will he come, and not be slow          
    His footsteps cannot err.                     

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   THY gracious ear, O Lord, encline,
    O hear me I thee pray,
    For I am poor, and almost pine
    With need, and sad decay.

RHYME a b a b

   Preserve my soul, for *I have trod           
    Thy waies, and love the just,                
    Save thou thy servant O my God               
    Who still in thee doth trust.

RHYME a b a b

   Pity me Lord for daily thee
    I call;  O make rejoyce                     
    Thy Servants Soul; for Lord to thee
    I lift my soul and voice,

RHYME a b a b

   For thou art good, thou Lord art prone
    To pardon, thou to all
    Art full of mercy, thou alone
    To them that on thee call.

RHYME a b a b

   Unto my supplication Lord
    Give ear, and to the crie
    Of my incessant praiers afford
    Thy hearing graciously.                      

RHYME a b a b

   I in the day of my distress
    Will call on thee for aid;
    For thou wilt grant me free access
    And answer, what I pray'd.

RHYME a b a b

   Like thee among the gods is none
    O Lord, nor any works
    Of all that other Gods have done
    Like to thy glorious works.

RHYME a b a b

   The Nations all whom thou hast made
    Shall come, and all shall frame              
    To bow them low before thee Lord,
    And glorifie thy name.

RHYME a b a b

  For great thou art, and wonders great
    By thy strong hand are done,
    Thou in thy everlasting Seat
    Remainest God alone.

RHYME a b a b

  Teach me O Lord thy way most right,
    I in thy truth will hide,
    To fear thy name my heart unite
    So shall it never slide.                     

RHYME a b a b

  Thee will I praise O Lord my God
    Thee honour, and adore
    With my whole heart, and blaze abroad
    Thy name for ever more.

RHYME a b a b

  For great thy mercy is toward me,
    And thou hast free'd my Soul
    Eev'n from the lowest Hell set free
    From deepest darkness foul.

RHYME a b a b

  O God the proud against me rise
    And violent men are met                      
    To seek my life, and in their eyes
    No fear of thee have set.

RHYME a b a b

  But thou Lord art the God most mild
    Readiest thy grace to shew,
    Slow to be angry, and art stil'd
    Most mercifull, most true.

RHYME a b a b

  O turn to me thy face at length,
    And me have mercy on,
    Unto thy servant give thy strength,
    And save thy hand-maids Son.                 

RHYME a b a b

  Some sign of good to me afford,
    And let my foes then see
    And be asham'd, because thou Lord
    Do'st help and comfort me.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   AMONG the holy Mountains high
    Is his foundation fast,
    There Seated in his Sanctuary,
    His Temple there is plac't.

RHYME a b a b

   Sions fair Gates the Lord loves more
    Then all the dwellings faire
    Of Jacobs Land, though there be store,
    And all within his care.

RHYME a b a b

   City of God, most glorious things
    Of thee abroad are spoke;                    
   I mention Egypt, where proud Kings
    Did our forefathers yoke,

RHYME a b a b

    I mention Babel to my friends,
    Philistia full of scorn,
    And Tyre with Ethiops utmost ends,
    Lo this man there was born:

RHYME a b a b

   But twise that praise shall in our ear
    Be said of Sion last
    This and this man was born in her,
    High God shall fix her fast.                 

RHYME a b a b

   The Lord shall write it in a Scrowle
    That ne're shall be out-worn
    When he the Nations doth enrowle
    That this man there was born.

RHYME a b a b

   Both they who sing, and they who dance
    With sacred Songs are there,
    In thee fresh brooks, and soft streams glance
    And all my fountains clear.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b

   LORD God that dost me save and keep,
    All day to thee I cry;
    And all night long, before thee weep
    Before thee prostrate lie.

RHYME a b a b

   Into thy presence let my praier
    With sighs devout ascend
    And to my cries, that ceaseless are,
    Thine ear with favour bend.

RHYME a b a b

   For cloy'd with woes and trouble store
    Surcharg'd my Soul doth lie,                 
    My life at death's uncherful dore
    Unto the grave draws nigh.

RHYME a b a b

   Reck'n'd I am with them that pass
    Down to the dismal pit
    I am a *man, but weak alas               
    And for that name unfit.                     

RHYME a b a b

   From life discharg'd and parted quite
    Among the dead to sleep
    And like the slain in bloody fight
    That in the grave lie deep.                  

RHYME a b a b

    Whom thou rememberest no more,
    Dost never more regard,
    Them from thy hand deliver'd o're
    Deaths hideous house hath barr'd.

RHYME a b a b

   Thou in the lowest pit profound'
    Hast set me all forlorn,
    Where thickest darkness hovers round,
    In horrid deeps to mourn.

RHYME a b a b

   Thy wrath from which no shelter saves
    Full sore doth press on me;                  
   *Thou break'st upon me all thy waves,         
   *And all thy waves break me                   

RHYME a b a b

   Thou dost my friends from me estrange,
    And mak'st me odious,
    Me to them odious, for they change,
    And I here pent up thus.

RHYME a b a b

   Through sorrow, and affliction great
    Mine eye grows dim and dead,
    Lord all the day I thee entreat,
    My hands to thee I spread.                   

RHYME a b a b

  Wilt thou do wonders on the dead,
    Shall the deceas'd arise
    And praise thee from their loathsom bed
    With pale and hollow eyes ?

RHYME a b a b

  Shall they thy loving kindness tell
    On whom the grave hath hold,
    Or they who in perdition dwell
    Thy faithfulness unfold?

RHYME a b a b

  In darkness can thy mighty hand
    Or wondrous acts be known,                   
    Thy justice in the gloomy land
    Of dark oblivion?

RHYME a b a b

  But I to thee O Lord do cry
    E're yet my life be spent,
    And up to thee my praier doth hie
    Each morn, and thee prevent.

RHYME a b a b

  Why wilt thou Lord my soul forsake,
    And hide thy face from me,
  That am already bruis'd, and *shake          
    With terror sent from thee;                  

RHYME a b a b

    Bruz'd, and afflicted and so low
    As ready to expire,
    While I thy terrors undergo
    Astonish'd with thine ire.

RHYME a b a b

  Thy fierce wrath over me doth flow
    Thy threatnings cut me through.
  All day they round about me go,
    Like waves they me persue.

RHYME a b a b

  Lover and friend thou hast remov'd
    And sever'd from me far.                     
    They fly me now whom I have lov'd,
    And as in darkness are.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

WHEN I beheld the Poet blind, yet bold,
In slender Book his vast Design unfold,
Messiah Crown'd, Gods Reconcil'd Decree,
Rebelling Angels, the Forbidden Tree,
Heav'n, Hell, Earth, Chaos, All; the Argument
Held me a while misdoubting his Intent,
That he would ruine (for I saw him strong)
The sacred Truths to Fable and old Song
(So Sampson groap'd the Temples Posts in spight)
The World o'rewhelming to revenge his sight.

RHYME a a *

Yet as I read soon growing less severe,
I lik'd his Project, the success did fear;
Through that wide Field how he his way should find
O're which lame Faith leads Understanding blind;
Lest he perplex'd the things he would explain,
And what was easie he should render vain.

RHYME a a *

Or if a Work so infinite he spann'd,
Jealous I was that some less skilful hand
(Such as disquiet always what is well,
And by ill imitating would excell)
Might hence presume the whole Creations day
To change in Scenes. and show it in a Play.

RHYME a a *

Pardon me, Mighty Poet, nor despise
My causeless, yet not impious, surmise.
But I am now convinc'd, and none will dare
Within thy Labours to pretend a share,
Thou hast not miss'd one thought that could be fit,
And all that was improper dost omit:
So that no room is here for Writers left,
But to detect their Ignorance or Theft.

RHYME a a *

That Majesty which through thy Work doth Reign
Draws the Devout, deterring the Profane,
And things divine thou treatst of in such state
As them preserves, and thee, inviolate.
At once delight and horrour on us seise,
Thou singst with so much gravity and ease;

RHYME a a *

And above humane flight dost soar aloft
With Plume so strong, so equal, and so soft.
The Bird nam'd from that Paradise you sing
So never flaggs, but always keeps on Wing.

RHYME a a *

Where couldst thou words of such a compass find?
Whence furnish such a vast expence of mind?
Just Heav'n thee like Tiresias to requite
Rewards with Prophesie thy loss of sight.

RHYME a a *

Well mightst thou scorn thy Readers to allure
With tinkling Rhime, of thy own sense secure;
While the Town-Bayes writes all the while and spells,
And like a Pack-horse tires without his Bells:
Their Fancies like our Bushy-points appear,
The Poets tag them, we for fashion wear.
I too transported by the Mode offend,
And while I meant to Praise thee must Commend.
Thy Verse created like thy Theme sublime,
In Number, Weight, and Measure, needs not Rhime.

TITLE 

RHYME a b a b c d d c 

Fly envious Time till thou run out thy race
call on the lazie leaden-stepping howres
whose speed is but the heavie plummets pace
& glut thy selfe wth what thy womb devoures
Wch is no more then what is false & vaine
& meerly mortall drosse
so little is our losse
so little is thy gaine

RHYME a a *

for when as each thing bad thou hast entomb'd
& last of all thy greedie selfe consum'd                             
then long Aeternity shall greet our blisse
wth an individuall kisse
and Joy shall overtake us as a flood
when every thing yt is sincerely good
& pfectly divine
with Truth, & Peace, & Love shall ever shine
about the supreme throne
of him t' whose happy-making sight alone
when once our heav'nly-guided soule shall clime
then all this earthie grossnesse quit                                
attir'd wth starres wee shall for ever sit
Triumphing over Death, & Chance, & thee O Time.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d

O Nightingale, that on yon bloomy Spray
Warbl'st at eeve, when all the Woods are still,
Thou with fresh hope the Lovers heart dost fill,
While the jolly hours lead on propitious May,
Thy liquid notes that close the eye of Day,
First heard before the shallow Cuccoo's bill
Portend success in love; O if Jove's will
Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay,
Now timely sing, ere the rude Bird of Hate
Foretell my hopeles doom in som Grove ny:                            
As thou from yeer to yeer hast sung too late
For my relief; yet hadst no reason why,
Whether the Muse, or Love call thee his mate,
Both them I serve, and of their train am I.


RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Colin my dear and most entire beloved,
      My muse audacious stoops her pitch to thee,
      Desiring that thy patience be not moved
      By these rude lines, written here you see;
    Fain would my muse whom cruel love hath wronged,
      Shroud her love labours under thy protection,
      And I myself with ardent zeal have longed
      That thou mightst know to thee my true affection.
    Therefore, good Colin, graciously accept
      A few sad sonnets which my muse hath framed;
      Though they but newly from the shell are crept,
      Suffer them not by envy to be blamed,
    But underneath the shadow of thy wings
    Give warmth to these young-hatched orphan things.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Give warmth to these young-hatched orphan things,
      Which chill with cold to thee for succour creep;
      They of my study are the budding springs;
      Longer I cannot them in silence keep.
    They will be gadding sore against my mind.
      But courteous shepherd, if they run astray,
      Conduct them that they may the pathway find,
      And teach them how the mean observe they may.
    Thou shalt them ken by their discording notes,
      Their weeds are plain, such as poor shepherds wear;
      Unshapen, torn, and ragged are their coats,
      Yet forth they wand'ring are devoid of fear.
    They which have tasted of the muses' spring,
    I hope will smile upon the tunes they sing.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    You whom the world admires for rarest style,
      You which have sung the sonnets of true love,
      Upon my maiden verse with favour smile,
      Whose weak-penned muse to fly too soon doth prove;
    Before her feathers have their full perfection,
    She soars aloft, pricked on by blind affection.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    You whose deep wits, ingine, and industry,
      The everlasting palm of praise have won,
      You paragons of learned poesy,
      Favour these mists, which fall before your sun,
    Intentions leading to a more effect
    If you them grace but with your mild aspect.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    And thou the Genius of my ill-tuned note,
      Whose beauty urged hath my rustic vein
      Through mighty oceans of despair to float,
      That I in rime thy cruelty complain:
    Vouchsafe to read these lines both harsh and bad
    Nuntiates of woe with sorrow being clad.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Courteous Calliope, vouchsafe to lend
      Thy helping hand to my untuned song,
      And grace these lines which I to write pretend,
      Compelled by love which doth poor Corin wrong.
    And those thy sacred sisters I beseech,
      Which on Parnassus' mount do ever dwell,
      To shield my country muse and rural speech
      By their divine authority and spell.
    Lastly to thee, O Pan, the shepherds' king,
      And you swift-footed Dryades I call;
      Attend to hear a swain in verse to sing
      Sonnets of her that keeps his heart in thrall!
    O Chloris, weigh the task I undertake!
    Thy beauty subject of my song I make.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Thy beauty subject of my song I make,
      O fairest fair, on whom depends my life!
      Refuse not then the task I undertake,
      To please thy rage and to appease my strife;
    But with one smile remunerate my toil,
      None other guerdon I of thee desire.
      Give not my lowly muse new-hatched the foil,
      But warmth that she may at the length aspire
    Unto the temples of thy star-bright eyes,
      Upon whose round orbs perfect beauty sits,
      From whence such glorious crystal beams arise,
      As best my Chloris' seemly face befits;
    Which eyes, which beauty, which bright crystal beam,
    Which face of thine hath made my love extreme.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Feed, silly sheep, although your keeper pineth,
      Yet like to Tantalus doth see his food.
      Skip you and leap, no bright Apollo shineth,
      Whilst I bewail my sorrows in yon wood,
    Where woeful Philomela doth record,
      And sings with notes of sad and dire lament
      The tragedy wrought by her sisters' lord;
      I'll bear a part in her black discontent.
    That pipe which erst was wont to make you glee
      Upon these downs whereon you careless graze,
      Shall to her mournful music tuned be.
      Let not my plaints, poor lambkins, you amaze;
    There underneath that dark and dusky bower,
    Whole showers of tears to Chloris I will pour.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Whole showers of tears to Chloris I will pour,
      As true oblations of my sincere love,
      If that will not suffice, most fairest flower,
      Then shall my sighs thee unto pity move.
    If neither tears nor sighs can aught prevail,
      My streaming blood thine anger shall appease,
      This hand of mine by vigour shall assail
      To tear my heart asunder thee to please.
    Celestial powers on you I invocate;
      You know the chaste affections of my mind,
      I never did my faith yet violate;
      Why should my Chloris then be so unkind?
    That neither tears, nor sighs, nor streaming blood,
    Can unto mercy move her cruel mood.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    You fawns and silvans, when my Chloris brings
      Her flocks to water in your pleasant plains,
      Solicit her to pity Corin's strings,
      The smart whereof for her he still sustains.
    For she is ruthless of my woeful song;
      My oaten reed she not delights to hear.
      O Chloris, Chloris! Corin thou dost wrong,
      Who loves thee better than his own heart dear.
    The flames of Aetna are not half so hot
      As is the fire which thy disdain hath bread.
      Ah cruel fates, why do you then besot
      Poor Corin's soul with love, when love is fled?
    Either cause cruel Chloris to relent,
    Or let me die upon the wound she sent!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    You lofty pines, co-partners of my woe,
      When Chloris sitteth underneath your shade,
      To her those sighs and tears I pray you show,
      Whilst you attending I for her have made.
    Whilst you attending, dropped have sweet balm
      In token that you pity my distress,
      Zephirus hath your stately boughs made calm.
      Whilst I to you my sorrows did express,
    The neighbour mountains bended have their tops,
      When they have heard my rueful melody,
      And elves in rings about me leaps and hops,
      To frame my passions to their jollity.
    Resounding echoes from their obscure caves,
    Reiterate what most my fancy craves.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    What need I mourn, seeing Pan our sacred king
      Was of that nymph fair Syrinx coy disdained?
      The world's great light which comforteth each thing,
      All comfortless for Daphne's sake remained.
    If gods can find no help to heal the sore
      Made by love's shafts, which pointed are with fire,
      Unhappy Corin, then thy chance deplore,
      Sith they despair by wanting their desire.
    I am not Pan though I a shepherd be,
      Yet is my love as fair as Syrinx was.
      My songs cannot with Phoebus' tunes agree,
      Yet Chloris' doth his Daphne's far surpass.
    How much more fair by so much more unkind,
    Than Syrinx coy, or Daphne, I her find!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    No sooner had fair Phoebus trimmed his car,
      Being newly risen from Aurora's bed,
      But I in whom despair and hope did war,
      My unpenned flock unto the mountains led.
    Tripping upon the snow-soft downs I spied
      Three nymphs more fairer than those beautys three
      Which did appear to Paris on mount Ide.
      Coming more near, my goddess I there see;
    For she the field-nymphs oftentimes doth haunt,
      To hunt with them the fierce and savage boar;
      And having sported virelays they chaunt,
      Whilst I unhappy helpless cares deplore.
    There did I call to her, ah too unkind!
    But tiger-like, of me she had no mind.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Unto the fountain where fair Delia chaste
      The proud Acteon turned to a hart,
      I drove my flock, that water sweet to taste,
      'Cause from the welkin Phoebus 'gan depart.
    There did I see the nymph whom I admire,
      Rememb'ring her locks, of which the yellow hue
      Made blush the beauties of her curled wire,
      Which Jove himself with wonder well might view;
    Then red with ire, her tresses she berent,
      And weeping hid the beauty of her face,
      Whilst I amazed at her discontent,
      With tears and sighs do humbly sue for grace;
    But she regarding neither tears nor moan,
    Flies from the fountain leaving me alone.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Am I a Gorgon that she doth me fly,
      Or was I hatched in the river Nile?
      Or doth my Chloris stand in doubt that I
      With syren songs do seek her to beguile?
    If any one of these she can object
      'Gainst me, which chaste affected love protest,
      Then might my fortunes by her frowns be checked,
      And blameless she from scandal free might rest.
    But seeing I am no hideous monster born,
      But have that shape which other men do bear,
      Which form great Jupiter did never scorn,
      Amongst his subjects here on earth to wear,
    Why should she then that soul with sorrow fill,
    Which vowed hath to love and serve her still?

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Tell me, my dear, what moves thy ruthless mind
      To be so cruel, seeing thou art so fair?
      Did nature frame thy beauty so unkind?
      Or dost thou scorn to pity my despair?
    O no, it was not nature's ornament,
      But winged love's unpartial cruel wound,
      Which in my heart is ever permanent,
      Until my Chloris make me whole and sound.
    O glorious love-god, think on my heart's grief;
      Let not thy vassal pine through deep disdain;
      By wounding Chloris I shall find relief,
      If thou impart to her some of my pain.
    She doth thy temples and thy shrines abject;
    They with Amintas' flowers by me are decked.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Cease, eyes, to weep sith none bemoans your weeping;
      Leave off, good muse, to sound the cruel name
      Of my love's queen which hath my heart in keeping,
      Yet of my love doth make a jesting game!
    Long hath my sufferance laboured to inforce
      One pearl of pity from her pretty eyes,
      Whilst I with restless oceans of remorse
      Bedew the banks where my fair Chloris lies,
    Where my fair Chloris bathes her tender skin,
      And doth triumph to see such rivers fall
      From those moist springs, which never dry have been
      Since she their honour hath detained in thrall;
    And still she scorns one favouring smile to show
    Unto those waves proceeding from my woe.

RHYME a b a b *

    What time fair Titan in the zenith sat,
      And equally the fixed poles did heat,
      When to my flock my daily woes I chat,
      And underneath a broad beech took my seat,
    The dreaming god which Morpheus poets call,
      Augmenting fuel to my Aetna's fire,
      With sleep possessing my weak senses all,
      In apparitions makes my hopes aspire.
    Methought I saw the nymph I would embrace,
      With arms abroad coming to me for help,
      A lust-led satyr having her in chase
      Which after her about the fields did yelp.
    I seeing my love in perplexed plight,
      A sturdy bat from off an oak I reft,
      And with the ravisher continue fight
      Till breathless I upon the earth him left.
    Then when my coy nymph saw her breathless foe,
      With kisses kind she gratifies my pain,
      Protesting never rigour more to show.
      Happy was I this good hap to obtain;
    But drowsy slumbers flying to their cell,
      My sudden joy converted was to bale;
      My wonted sorrows still with me do dwell.
      I looked round about on hill and dale,

RHYME a a 

    But I could neither my fair Chloris view,
    Nor yet the satyr which erstwhile I slew.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Mournful Amintas, thou didst pine with care,
      Because the fates by their untimely doom
      Of life bereft thy loving Phillis fair,
      When thy love's spring did first begin to bloom.
    My care doth countervail that care of thine,
      And yet my Chloris draws her angry breath;
      My hopes still hoping hopeless now repine,
      For living she doth add to me but death.
    Thy Phinis, dying, loved thee full dear;
      My Chloris, living, hates poor Corin's love,
      Thus doth my woe as great as thine appear,
      Though sundry accents both our sorrows move.
    Thy swan-like songs did show thy dying anguish;
    These weeping truce-men show I living languish.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    These weeping truce-men show I living languish,
      My woeful wailings tells my discontent;
      Yet Chloris nought esteemeth of mine anguish,
      My thrilling throbs her heart cannot relent.
    My kids to hear the rimes and roundelays
      Which I on wasteful hills was wont to sing,
      Did more delight the lark in summer days,
      Whose echo made the neighbour groves to ring.
    But now my flock all drooping bleats and cries,
      Because my pipe, the author of their sport,
      All rent and torn and unrespected lies;
      Their lamentations do my cares consort.
    They cease to feed and listen to the plaint
    Which I pour forth unto a cruel saint.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Which I pour forth unto a cruel saint,
      Who merciless my prayers doth attend,
      Who tiger-like doth pity my complaint,
      And never ear unto my woes will lend!
    But still false hope dispairing life deludes,
      And tells my fancy I shall grace obtain;
      But Chloris fair my orisons concludes
      With fearful frowns, presagers of my pain.
    Thus do I spend the weary wand'ring day,
      Oppressed with a chaos of heart's grief;
      Thus I consume the obscure night away,
      Neglecting sleep which brings all cares relief;
    Thus do I pass my ling'ring life in woe;
    But when my bliss will come I do not know.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    The perils which Leander took in hand
      Fair Hero's love and favour to obtain,
      When void of fear securely leaving land,
      Through Hellespont he swam to Cestos' main,
    His dangers should not counterpoise my toil,
      If my dear love would once but pity show,
      To quench these flames which in my breast do broil,
      Or dry these springs which from mine eyes do flow.
    Not only Hellespont but ocean seas,
      For her sweet sake to ford I would attempt,
      So that my travels would her ire appease,
      My soul from thrall and languish to exempt.
    O what is't not poor I would undertake,
    If labour could my peace with Chloris make!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    My love, I cannot thy rare beauties place
      Under those forms which many writers use:
      Some like to stones compare their mistress' face;
      Some in the name of flowers do love abuse;
    Some makes their love a goldsmith's shop to be,
      Where orient pearls and precious stones abound;
      In my conceit these far do disagree
      The perfect praise of beauty forth to sound.
    O Chloris, thou dost imitate thyself,
      Self's imitating passeth precious stones,
      Or all the eastern Indian golden pelf;
      Thy red and white with purest fair atones;
    Matchless for beauty nature hath thee framed,
    Only unkind and cruel thou art named!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    The hound by eating grass doth find relief,
      For being sick it is his choicest meat;
      The wounded hart doth ease his pain and grief
      If he the herb dictamion may eat;
    The loathsome snake renews his sight again,
      When he casts off his withered coat and hue;
      The sky-bred eagle fresh age doth obtain
      When he his beak decayed doth renew.
    I worse than these whose sore no salve can cure,
      Whose grief no herb nor plant nor tree can ease;
      Remediless, I still must pain endure,
      Till I my Chloris' furious mood can please;
    She like the scorpion gave to me a wound,
    And like the scorpion she must make me sound.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Ye wasteful woods, bear witness of my woe,
      Wherein my plaints did oftentimes abound;
      Ye careless birds my sorrows well do know,
      They in your songs were wont to make a sound!
    Thou pleasant spring canst record likewise bear
      Of my designs and sad disparagement,
      When thy transparent billows mingled were
      With those downfalls which from mine eyes were sent!
    The echo of my still-lamenting cries,
      From hollow vaults in treble voice resoundeth,
      And then into the empty air it flies,
      And back again from whence it came reboundeth.
    That nymph unto my clamors doth reply,
    Being likewise scorned in love as well as I.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Being likewise scorned in love as well as I
      By that self-loving boy, which did disdain
      To hear her after him for love to cry,
      For which in dens obscure she doth remain;
    Yet doth she answer to each speech and voice,
      And renders back the last of what we speak,
      But specially, if she might have her choice,
      She of unkindness would her talk forth break.
    She loves to hear of love's most sacred name,
      Although, poor nymph, in love she was despised;
      And ever since she hides her head for shame,
      That her true meaning was so lightly prised;
    She pitying me, part of my woes doth bear,
    As you, good shepherds, listening now shall hear.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    O fairest fair, to thee I make my plaint,
      To thee from whom my cause of grief doth spring;
      Attentive be unto the groans, sweet saint,
      Which unto thee in doleful tunes I sing.
    My mournful muse doth always speak of thee;
      My love is pure, O do it not disdain!
      With bitter sorrow still oppress not me,
      But mildly look upon me which complain.
    Kill not my true-affecting thoughts, but give
      Such precious balm of comfort to my heart,
      That casting off despair in hope to live,
      I may find help at length to ease my smart.
    So shall you add such courage to my love,
    That fortune false my faith shall not remove.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    The phoenix fair which rich Arabia breeds,
      When wasting time expires her tragedy,
      No more on Phoebus' radiant rays she feeds,
      But heapeth up great store of spicery;
    And on a lofty towering cedar tree,
      With heavenly substance she herself consumes,
      From whence she young again appears to be,
      Out of the cinders of her peerless plumes.
    So I which long have fried in love's flame,
      The fire not made of spice but sighs and tears,
      Revive again in hope disdain to shame,
      And put to flight the author of my fears.
    Her eyes revive decaying life in me,
    Though they augmenters of my thraldom be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Though they augmenters of my thraldom be,
      For her I live and her I love and none else;
      O then, fair eyes, look mildly upon me,
      Who poor, despised, forlorn must live alone else,
    And like Amintas haunt the desert cells,
      And moanless there breathe out thy cruelty,
      Where none but care and melancholy dwells.
      I for revenge to Nemesis will cry;
    If that will not prevail, my wandering ghost,
      Which breathless here this love-scorched trunk shall leave,
      Shall unto thee with tragic tidings post,
      How thy disdain did life from soul bereave.
    Then all too late my death thou wilt repent,
    When murther's guilt thy conscience shall torment.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Who doth not know that love is triumphant,
      Sitting upon the throne of majesty?
      The gods themselves his cruel darts do daunt,
      And he, blind boy, smiles at their misery.
    Love made great Jove ofttimes transform his shape;
      Love made the fierce Alcides stoop at last;
      Achilles, stout and bold, could not escape
      The direful doom which love upon him cast;
    Love made Leander pass the dreadful flood
      Which Cestos from Abydos doth divide;
      Love made a chaos where proud Ilion stood,
      Through love the Carthaginian Dido died.
    Thus may we see how love doth rule and reigns,
    Bringing those under which his power disdains.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Though you be fair and beautiful withal,
      And I am black for which you me despise,
      Know that your beauty subject is to fall,
      Though you esteem it at so high a price.
    And time may come when that whereof you boast,
      Which is your youth's chief wealth and ornament,
      Shall withered be by winter's raging frost,
      When beauty's pride and flowering years are spent.
    Then wilt thou mourn when none shall thee respect;
      Then wilt thou think how thou hast scorned my tears;
      Then pitiless each one will thee neglect,
      When hoary grey shall dye thy yellow hairs;
    Then wilt thou think upon poor Corin's case,
    Who loved thee dear, yet lived in thy disgrace.

RHYME a a *

    O Love, leave off with sorrow to torment me;
    Let my heart's grief and pining pain content thee!
    The breach is made, I give thee leave to enter;
    Thee to resist, great god, I dare not venter!
    Restless desire doth aggravate mine anguish,
    Careful conceits do fill my soul with languish.
    Be not too cruel in thy conquest gained,
    Thy deadly shafts hath victory obtained;
    Batter no more my fort with fierce affection,
    But shield me captive under thy protection.
    I yield to thee, O Love, thou art the stronger,
    Raise then thy siege and trouble me no longer!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    What cruel star or fate had domination
      When I was born, that thus my love is crossed?
      Or from what planet had I derivation
      That thus my life in seas of woe is crossed?
    Doth any live that ever had such hap
      That all their actions are of none effect,
      Whom fortune never dandled in her lap
      But as an abject still doth me reject?
    Ah tickle dame! and yet thou constant art
      My daily grief and anguish to increase,
      And to augment the troubles of my heart
      Thou of these bonds wilt never me release;
    So that thy darlings me to be may know
    The true idea of all worldly woe.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Some in their hearts their mistress' colours bears;
      Some hath her gloves, some other hath her garters,
      Some in a bracelet wears her golden hairs,
      And some with kisses seal their loving charters.
    But I which never favour reaped yet,
      Nor had one pleasant look from her fair brow,
      Content myself in silent shade to sit
      In hope at length my cares to overplow.
    Meanwhile mine eyes shall feed on her fair face,
      My sighs shall tell to her my sad designs,
      My painful pen shall ever sue for grace
      To help my heart, which languishing now pines;
    And I will triumph still amidst my woe
    Till mercy shall my sorrows overflow.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    The raging sea within his limits lies
      And with an ebb his flowing doth discharge;
      The rivers when beyond their bounds they rise,
      Themselves do empty in the ocean large;
    But my love's sea which never limit keepeth,
      Which never ebbs but always ever floweth,
      In liquid salt unto my Chloris weepeth,
      Yet frustrate are the tears which he bestoweth.
    This sea which first was but a little spring
      Is now so great and far beyond all reason,
      That it a deluge to my thoughts doth bring,
      Which overwhelmed hath my joying season.
    So hard and dry is my saint's cruel mind,
    These waves no way in her to sink can find.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    These waves no way in her to sink can find
      To penetrate the pith of contemplation;
      These tears cannot dissolve her hardened mind,
      Nor move her heart on me to take compassion;
    O then, poor Corin, scorned and quite despised,
      Loathe now to live since life procures thy woe;
      Enough, thou hast thy heart anatomised,
      For her sweet sake which will no pity show;
    But as cold winter's storms and nipping frost
      Can never change sweet Aramanthus' hue,
      So though my love and life by her are crossed.
      My heart shall still be constant firm and true.
    Although Erynnis hinders Hymen's rites,
    My fixed faith against oblivion fights.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    My fixed faith against oblivion fights,
      And I cannot forget her, pretty elf,
      Although she cruel be unto my plights;
      Yet let me rather clean forget myself,
    Then her sweet name out of my mind should go,
      Which is th' elixir of my pining soul,
      From whence the essence of my life doth flow,
      Whose beauty rare my senses all control;
    Themselves most happy evermore accounting,
      That such a nymph is queen of their affection,
      With ravished rage they to the skies are mounting,
      Esteeming not their thraldom nor subjection;
    But still do joy amidst their misery,
    With patience bearing love's captivity.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    With patience bearing love's captivity,
      Themselves unguilty of his wrath alleging;
      These homely lines, abjects of poesy,
      For liberty and for their ransom pledging,
    And being free they solemnly do vow,
      Under his banner ever arms to bear
      Against those rebels which do disallow
      That love of bliss should be the sovereign heir;
    And Chloris if these weeping truce-men may
      One spark of pity from thine eyes obtain,
      In recompense of their sad heavy lay,
      Poor Corin shall thy faithful friend remain;
    And what I say I ever will approve,
    No joy may be compared to thy love!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    The bird of Thrace which doth bewail her rape,
      And murthered Itys eaten by his sire,
      When she her woes in doleful tunes doth shape,
      She sets her breast against a thorny briar;
    Because care-charmer sleep should not disturb
      The tragic tale which to the night she tells,
      She doth her rest and quietness thus curb
      Amongst the groves where secret silence dwells:
    Even so I wake, and waking wail all night;
      Chloris' unkindness slumbers doth expel;
      I need not thorn's sweet sleep to put to flight,
      Her cruelty my golden rest doth quell,
    That day and night to me are always one,
    Consumed in woe, in tears, in sighs and moan.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Like to the shipman in his brittle boat.
      Tossed aloft by the unconstant wind,
      By dangerous rocks and whirling gulfs doth float,
      Hoping at length the wished port to find;
    So doth my love in stormy billows sail,
      And passeth the gaping Scilla's waves,
      In hope at length with Chloris to prevail
      And win that prize which most my fancy craves,
    Which unto me of value will be more
      Then was that rich and wealthy golden fleece.
      Which Jason stout from Colchos' island bore
      With wind in sails unto the shore of Greece.
    More rich, more rare, more worth her love I prize
    Then all the wealth which under heaven lies.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    O what a wound and what a deadly stroke,
      Doth Cupid give to us perplexed lovers,
      Which cleaves more fast then ivy doth to oak,
      Unto our hearts where he his might discovers!
    Though warlike Mars were armed at all points,
      With that tried coat which fiery Vulcan made,
      Love's shafts did penetrate his steeled joints,
      And in his breast in streaming gore did wade.
    So pitiless is this fell conqueror
      That in his mother's paps his arrows stuck;
      Such is his rage that he doth not defer
      To wound those orbs from whence he life did suck.
    Then sith no mercy he shows to his mother,
    We meekly must his force and rigour smother.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Each beast in field doth wish the morning light;
      The birds to Hesper pleasant lays do sing;
      The wanton kids well-fed rejoice in night,
      Being likewise glad when day begins to spring.
    But night nor day are welcome unto me,
      Both can bear witness of my lamentation;
      All day sad sighing Corin you shall see,
      All night he spends in tears and exclamation.
    Thus still I live although I take no rest,
      But living look as one that is a-dying;
      Thus my sad soul with care and grief oppressed,
      Seems as a ghost to Styx and Lethe flying.
    Thus hath fond love bereft my youthful years
    Of all good hap before old age appears.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    That day wherein mine eyes cannot her see,
      Which is the essence of their crystal sight,
      Both blind, obscure and dim that day they be,
      And are debarred of fair heaven's light;
    That day wherein mine ears do want to hear her,
      Hearing that day is from me quite bereft;
      That day wherein to touch I come not near her,
      That day no sense of touching I have left;
    That day wherein I lack the fragrant smell,
      Which from her pleasant amber breath proceedeth,
      Smelling that day disdains with me to dwell,
      Only weak hope my pining carcase feedeth.
    But burst, poor heart, thou hast no better hope,
    Since all thy senses have no further scope!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    The stately lion and the furious bear
      The skill of man doth alter from their kind;
      For where before they wild and savage were,
      By art both tame and meek you shall them find.
    The elephant although a mighty beast,
      A man may rule according to his skill;
      The lusty horse obeyeth our behest,
      For with the curb you may him guide at will.
    Although the flint most hard contains the fire,
      By force we do his virtue soon obtain,
      For with a steel you shall have your desire,
      Thus man may all things by industry gain;
    Only a woman if she list not love,
    No art, nor force, can unto pity move.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    No art nor force can unto pity move
      Her stony heart that makes my heart to pant;
      No pleading passions of my extreme love
      Can mollify her mind of adamant.
    Ah cruel sex, and foe to all mankind,
      Either you love or else you hate too much!
      A glist'ring show of gold in you we find,
      And yet you prove but copper in the touch.
    But why, O why, do I so far digress?
      Nature you made of pure and fairest mould,
      The pomp and glory of man to depress,
      And as your slaves in thraldom them to hold;
    Which by experience now too well I prove,
    There is no pain unto the pains of love.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Fair shepherdess, when as these rustic lines
      Comes to thy sight, weigh but with what affection
      Thy servile doth depaint his sad designs,
      Which to redress of thee he makes election.
    If so you scorn, you kill; if you seem coy,
      You wound poor Corin to the very heart;
      If that you smile, you shall increase his joy;
      If these you like, you banish do all smart.
    And this I do protest, most fairest fair,
      My muse shall never cease that hill to climb,
      To which the learned Muses do repair,
      And all to deify thy name in rime;
    And never none shall write with truer mind,
    As by all proof and trial you shall find.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Die, die, my hopes! for you do but augment
      The burning accents of my deep despair;
      Disdain and scorn your downfall do consent;
      Tell to the world she is unkind yet fair!
    O eyes, close up those ever-running fountains,
      For pitiless are all the tears you shed
      Wherewith you watered have both dales and mountains!
      I see, I see, remorse from her is fled.
    Pack hence, ye sighs, into the empty air,
      Into the air that none your sound may hear,
      Sith cruel Chloris hath of you no care,
      Although she once esteemed you full dear!
    Let sable night all your disgraces cover,
    Yet truer sighs were never sighed by lover.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    Thou glorious sun, from whence my lesser light
      The substance of his crystal shine doth borrow,
      Let these my moans find favour in thy sight.
      And with remorse extinguish now my sorrow!
    Renew those lamps which thy disdain hath quenched,
      As Phoebus doth his sister Phoebe's shine;
      Consider how thy Corin being drenched
      In seas of woe, to thee his plaints incline,
    And at thy feet with tears doth sue for grace,
      Which art the goddess of his chaste desire;
      Let not thy frowns these labours poor deface
      Although aloft they at the first aspire;
    And time shall come as yet unknown to men
    When I more large thy praises forth shall pen!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    When I more large thy praises forth shall show,
      That all the world thy beauty shall admire,
      Desiring that most sacred nymph to know
      Which hath the shepherd's fancy set on fire;
    Till then, my dear, let these thine eyes content,
      Till then, fair love, think if I merit favour,
      Till then, O let thy merciful assent
      Relish my hopes with some comforting savour;
    So shall you add such courage to my muse
      That she shall climb the steep Parnassus hill,
      That learned poets shall my deeds peruse
      When I from thence obtained have more skill;
    And what I sing shall always be of thee
    As long as life or breath remains in me!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    When she was born whom I entirely love,
      Th' immortal gods her birth-rites forth to grace,
      Descending from their glorious seat above,
      They did on her these several virtues place:
    First Saturn gave to her sobriety,
      Jove then indued her with comeliness,
      And Sol with wisdom did her beautify,
      Mercury with wit and knowledge did her bless,
    Venus with beauty did all parts bedeck,
      Luna therewith did modesty combine,
      Diana chaste all loose desires did check,
      And like a lamp in clearness she doth shine.
    But Mars, according to his stubborn kind,
    No virtue gave, but a disdainful mind.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    When Chloris first with her heart-robbing eye
      Inchanted had my silly senses all,
      I little did respect love's cruelty,
      I never thought his snares should me enthrall;
    But since her tresses have entangled me,
      My pining flock did never hear me sing
      Those jolly notes which erst did make them glee,
      Nor do my kids about me leap and spring
    As they were wont, but when they hear me cry
      They likewise cry and fill the air with bleating;
      Then do my sheep upon the cold earth lie,
      And feed no more, my griefs they are repeating.
    O Chloris, if thou then saw'st them and me
    I'm sure thou wouldst both pity them and me!

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    I need not tell thee of the lily white,
      Nor of the roseate red which doth thee grace,
      Nor of thy golden hairs like Phoebus bright,
      Nor of the beauty of thy fairest face.
    Nor of thine eyes which heavenly stars excel,
      Nor of thine azured veins which are so clear,
      Nor of thy paps where Love himself doth dwell,
      Which like two hills of violets appear.
    Nor of thy tender sides, nor belly soft,
      Nor of thy goodly thighs as white as snow,
      Whose glory to my fancy seemeth oft
      That like an arch triumphal they do show.
    All these I know that thou dost know too well,
    But of thy heart too cruel I thee tell.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    But of thy heart too cruel I thee tell,
      Which hath tormented my young budding age,
      And doth, unless your mildness passions quell,
      My utter ruin near at hand presage.
    Instead of blood which wont was to display
      His ruddy red upon my hairless face,
      By over-grieving that is fled away,
      Pale dying colour there hath taken place.
    Those curled locks which thou wast wont to twist
      Unkempt, unshorn, and out of order been;
      Since my disgrace I had of them no list,
      Since when these eyes no joyful day have seen
    Nor never shall till you renew again
    The mutual love which did possess us twain.

RHYME a b a b c d c d e f e f g g 

    You that embrace enchanting poesy,
      Be gracious to perplexed Corin's lines;
      You that do feel love's proud authority,
      Help me to sing my sighs and sad designs.
    Chloris, requite not faithful love with scorn,
      But as thou oughtest have commiseration;
      I have enough anatomised and torn
      My heart, thereof to make a pure oblation.
    Likewise consider how thy Corin prizeth
      Thy parts above each absolute perfection,
      How he of every precious thing deviseth
      To make thee sovereign. Grant me then affection!
    Else thus I prize thee: Chloris is alone
    More hard than gold or pearl or precious stone.

RHYME a a *

  To the richest Treasury
That e'er fill'd ambitious eye;
To the faire bright Magazin
Hath impoverisht Love's Queen;
To th' Exchequer of all honour
(All take pensions but from her);
To the taper of the thore
Which the god himselfe but bore;
To the Sea of Chaste Delight;
Let me cast the Drop I write.
  And as at Loretto's shrine
Caesar shovels in his mine,
Th' Empres spreads her carkanets,
The lords submit their coronets,

RHYME a a *

Knights their chased armes hang by,
Maids diamond-ruby fancies tye;
Whilst from the pilgrim she wears
One poore false pearl, but ten true tears:
  So among the Orient prize,
(Saphyr-onyx eulogies)
Offer'd up unto your fame,
Take my GARNET-DUBLET name,
And vouchsafe 'midst those rich joyes
(With devotion) these TOYES.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Now y' have oblieg'd the age, thy wel known worth
Is to our joy auspiciously brought forth.
Good morrow to thy son, thy first borne flame
Which, as thou gav'st it birth, stamps it a name,
That Fate and a discerning age shall set
The chiefest jewell in her coronet.

RHYME a a *

Why then needs all this paines, those season'd pens,
That standing lifeguard to a booke (kinde friends),
That with officious care thus guard thy gate,
As if thy Child were illigitimate?
Forgive their freedome, since unto their praise
They write to give, not to dispute thy bayes.

RHYME a a *

As when some glorious queen, whose pregnant wombe
Brings forth a kingdome with her first-borne Sonne,
Marke but the subjects joyfull hearts and eyes:
Some offer gold, and others sacrifice;
This slayes a lambe, that, not so rich as hee,
Brings but a dove, this but a bended knee;
And though their giftes be various, yet their sence
Speaks only this one thought, Long live the prince.

RHYME a a *

So, my best brother, if unto your name
I offer up a thin blew-burning flame,
Pardon my love, since none can make thee shine,
Vnlesse they kindle first their torch at thine.
Then as inspir'd, they boldly write, nay that,
Which their amazed lights but twinkl'd at,
And their illustrate thoughts doe voice this right,
Lucasta held their torch; thou gav'st it light.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

How humble is thy muse (Deare) that can daign
Such servants as my pen to entertaine!
When all the sonnes of wit glory to be
Clad in thy muses gallant livery.
I shall disgrace my master, prove a staine,
And no addition to his honour'd traine;
Though all that read me will presume to swear
I neer read thee: yet if it may appear,
I love the writer and admire the writ,
I my owne want betray, not wrong thy wit.
Did thy worke want a prayse, my barren brain
Could not afford it: my attempt were vaine.
It needs no foyle: All that ere writ before,
Are foyles to thy faire Poems, and no more.
Then to be lodg'd in the same sheets with thine,
May prove disgrace to yours, but grace to mine.

RHYME a a *

Deare Lovelace, I am now about to prove
I cannot write a verse, but can write love.
On such a subject as thy booke I coo'd
Write books much greater, but not half so good.
But as the humble tenant, that does bring
A chicke or egges for's offering,
Is tane into the buttry, and does fox
Equall with him that gave a stalled oxe:
So (since the heart of ev'ry cheerfull giver
Makes pounds no more accepted than a stiver),
Though som thy prayse in rich stiles sing, I may
In stiver-stile write love as well as they.
I write so well that I no criticks feare;
For who'le read mine, when as thy booke's so neer,
Vnlesse thy selfe? then you shall secure mine
From those, and Ile engage my selfe for thine.
They'l do't themselves; <thee> this allay you'l take,
I love thy book, and yet not for thy sake.

RHYME a a *

So from the pregnant braine of Jove did rise
Pallas, the queene of wit and beautious eyes,
As faire Lucasta from thy temples flowes,
Temples no lesse ingenious then Joves.
Alike in birth, so shall she be in fame,
And be immortall to preserve thy Name.

RHYME a a *

Now, when the wars augment our woes and fears,
And the shrill noise of drums oppresse our ears;
Now peace and safety from our shores are fled
To holes and cavernes to secure their head;
Now all the graces from the land are sent,
And the nine Muses suffer banishment;
Whence spring these raptures? whence this heavenly rime,
So calme and even in so harsh a time?
Well might that charmer his faire Caelia crowne,
And that more polish't Tyterus renowne
His Sacarissa, when in groves and bowres
They could repose their limbs on beds of flowrs:

RHYME a a *

When wit had prayse, and merit had reward,
And every noble spirit did accord
To love the Muses, and their priests to raise,
And interpale their browes with flourishing bayes;
But in a time distracted so to sing,
When peace is hurried hence on rages wing,
When the fresh bayes are from the Temple torne,
And every art and science made a scorne;
Then to raise up, by musicke of thy art,
Our drooping spirits and our grieved hearts;
Then to delight our souls, and to inspire
Our breast with pleasure from thy charming lyre;
Then to divert our sorrowes by thy straines,
Making us quite forget our seven yeers paines

RHYME a a *

In the past wars, unlesse that Orpheus be
A sharer in thy glory: for when he

RHYME a a *

He stroke his lute with like admired art,
And made the damned to forget their smart.

RHYME a a *

He that doth paint the beauties of your verse,
Must use your pensil, be polite, soft, terse;
Forgive that man whose best of art is love,
If he no equall master to you prove.
My heart is all my eloquence, and that
Speaks sharp affection, when my words fall flat;
I reade you like my mistresse, and discry
In every line the quicknesse of her eye:
Her smoothnesse in each syllable, her grace
To marshall ev'ry word in the right place.
It is the excellence and soule of wit,
When ev'ry thing is free as well as fit:

RHYME a a *

For metaphors packt up and crowded close
Swath <ye> minds sweetnes, and display the throws,
And, like those chickens hatcht in furnaces,
Produce or one limbe more, or one limbe lesse
Then nature bids.  Survey such when they write,
No clause but's justl'd with an epithite.
So powerfully you draw when you perswade,
Passions in you in us are vertues made;
Such is the magick of that lawfull shell
That where it doth but talke, it doth compell:
  For no Apelles 'till this time e're drew
  A Venus to the waste so well as you.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

The world shall now no longer mourne nor vex
For th' obliquity of a cross-grain'd sex;
Nor beauty swell above her bankes, (and made
For ornament) the universe invade
So fiercely, that 'tis question'd in our bookes,
Whether kils most the Amazon's sword or lookes.
Lucasta in loves game discreetly makes
Women and men joyntly to share the stakes,
And lets us know, when women scorne, it is
Mens hot love makes the antiparisthesis;
And a lay lover here such comfort finds
As Holy Writ gives to affected minds.

RHYME a a *

The wilder nymphs, lov's power could not comand,
Are by thy almighty numbers brought to hand,
And flying Daphnes, caught, amazed vow
They never heard Apollo court till now.
'Tis not by force of armes this feat is done,
For that would puzzle even the Knight o' th' Sun;
But 'tis by pow'r of art, and such a way
As Orpheus us'd, when he made fiends obay.

RHYME a a *

  Ovr times are much degenerate from those,
Which your sweet Muse, which your fair fortune chose;
And as complexions alter with the climes,
Our wits have drawne th' infection of our times.
That candid age no other way could tell
To be ingenious, but by speaking well.
Who best could prayse, had then the greatest prayse;
'Twas more esteemd to give then wear the bayes.
Modest ambition studi'd only then
To honour not her selfe, but worthy men.
These vertues now are banisht out of towne,
Our Civill Wars have lost the civicke crowne.
He highest builds, who with most art destroys,
And against others fame his owne employs.
I see the envious caterpillar sit
On the faire blossome of each growing wit.
  The ayre's already tainted with the swarms
Of insects, which against you rise in arms.
Word-peckers, paper-rats, book-scorpions,
Of wit corrupted the unfashion'd sons.
The barbed censurers begin to looke
Like the grim Consistory on thy booke;
And on each line cast a reforming eye
Severer then the yong presbytery.
Till, when in vaine they have thee all perus'd,
You shall for being faultlesse be accus'd.
Some reading your LUCASTA will alledge
You wrong'd in her the Houses priviledge;

RHYME a a *

Some that you under sequestration are,
Because you write when going to the Warre;
And one the book prohibits, because Kent
Their first Petition by the Authour sent.
  But when the beauteous ladies came to know,
That their deare Lovelace was endanger'd so:
Lovelace, that thaw'd the most congealed brest,
He who lov'd best, and them defended best,
Whose hand so rudely grasps the steely brand,
Whose hand so gently melts the ladies hand,
They all in mutiny, though yet undrest,
Sally'd, and would in his defence contest.
And one, the loveliest that was yet e're seen,
Thinking that I too of the rout had been,
Mine eyes invaded with a female spight
(She knew what pain 't would be to lose that sight).
O no, mistake not, I reply'd: for I
In your defence, or in his cause, would dy.
But he, secure of glory and of time,
Above their envy or mine aid doth clime.
Him valianst men and fairest nymphs approve,
His booke in them finds judgement, with you, love.

RHYME a a *

  If the desire of glory speak a mind
More nobly operative and more refin'd,
What vast soule moves thee, or what hero's spirit
(Kept in'ts traduction pure) dost thou inherit,
That, not contented with one single fame,
Dost to a double glory spread thy name,
And on thy happy temples safely set
Both th' Delphick wreath and civic coronet?
  Was't not enough for us to know how far
Thou couldst in season suffer, act and dare
But we must also witnesse, with what height
And what Ionick sweetnesse thou canst write,

RHYME a a *

And melt those eager passions, that are
Stubborn enough t' enrage the god of war
Into a noble love, which may expire
In an illustrious pyramid of fire;
Which, having gained his due station, may
Fix there, and everlasting flames display.
This is the braver path: time soone can smother
The dear-bought spoils and tropheis of the other.
How many fiery heroes have there been,
Whose triumphs were as soone forgot as seen?
Because they wanted some diviner one
To rescue <thee> from night, and make <thee> known.
  Such art thou to thy selfe.  While others dream
Strong flatt'ries on a fain'd or borrow'd theam,
Thou shalt remaine in thine owne lustre bright,
And adde unto 't LUCASTA'S chaster light.
  For none so fit to sing great things as he,
That can act o're all lights of poetry.
Thus had Achilles his owne gests design'd,
He had his genius Homer far outshin'd.

RHYME a a *

  Poets and painters have some near relation,
Compar'd with fancy and imagination;
The one paints shadowed persons (in pure kind),
The other paints the pictures of the mind
In purer verse.  And as rare Zeuxes fame
Shin'd, till Apelles art eclips'd the same
By a more exquisite and curious line
In Zeuxeses (with pensill far more fine),
So have our modern poets late done well,
Till thine appear'd (which scarce have paralel).
  They like to Zeuxes grapes beguile the sense,
But thine do ravish the intelligence,
Like the rare banquet of Apelles, drawn,
And covered over with most curious lawn.

RHYME a a *

  Thus if thy careles draughts are cal'd the best,
What would thy lines have beene, had'st thou profest
That faculty (infus'd) of poetry,
Which adds such honour unto thy chivalry?
Doubtles thy verse had all as far transcended
As Sydneyes Prose, who Poets once defended.
  For when I read thy much renowned pen,
My fancy there finds out another Ben
In thy brave language, judgement, wit, and art,
Of every piece of thine, in every part:
Where thy seraphique Sydneyan fire is raised high
In valour, vertue, love, and loyalty.
  Virgil was styl'd the loftiest of all,
Ovid the smoothest and most naturall;

RHYME a a *

Martiall concise and witty, quaint and pure,
Iuvenall grave and learned, though obscure.
  But all these rare ones which I heere reherse,
Do live againe in Thee, and in thy Verse:
Although not in the language of their time,
Yet in a speech as copious and sublime.
  The rare Apelles in thy picture wee
Perceive, and in thy soule Apollo see.
Wel may each Grace and Muse then crown thy praise
With Mars his banner and Minerva's bayes.

RHYME a a *

Chast as Creation meant us, and more bright
Then the first day in 's uneclipsed light,
Is thy LUCASTA; and thou offerest heere
Lines to her name as undefil'd and cleere;
Such as the first indeed more happy dayes
(When vertue, wit, and learning wore the bayes
Now vice assumes) would to her memory give:
A Vestall flame that should for ever live,
Plac't in a christal temple, rear'd to be
The Embleme of her thoughts integrity;
And on the porch thy name insculpt, my friend,
Whose love, like to the flame, can know no end.

RHYME a a *

The marble step that to the alter brings
The hallowed priests with their clean offerings,
Shall hold their names that humbly crave to be
Votaries to th' shrine, and grateful friends to thee.
So shal we live (although our offrings prove
Meane to the world) for ever by thy love.

RHYME a a *

Ile doe my nothing too, and try
To dabble to thy memory.
Not that I offer to thy name
Encomiums of thy lasting fame.
Those by the landed have been writ:
Mine's but a yonger-brother wit;
A wit that's hudled up in scarres,
Borne like my rough selfe in the warres;
And as a Squire in the fight
Serves only to attend the Knight,
So 'tis my glory in this field,
Where others act, to beare thy shield.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

     Enough, enough of orbs and spheres,
       Reach me a trumpet or a drum,
     To sound sharp synnets in your ears,
       And beat a deep encomium.

          
RHYME a b a b 

     I know not th' Eight Intelligence:
       Those that do understand it, pray
     Let them step hither, and from thence
       Speak what they all do sing or say:

          
RHYME a b a b 

     Nor what your diapasons are,
       Your sympathies and symphonies;
     To me they seem as distant farre
       As whence they take their infant rise.

          
RHYME a b a b 

     But I've a grateful heart can ring
       A peale of ordnance to your praise,
     And volleys of small plaudits bring
       To clowd a crown about your baies.

RHYME a b a b 

     Though laurel is thought thunder free,
       That storms and lightning disallows,
     Yet Caesar thorough fire and sea
       Snatches her to twist his conquering brows.

RHYME a b a b 

     And now me thinks like him you stand
       I' th' head of all the Poets' hoast,
     Whilest with your words you do command,
       They silent do their duty boast.
RHYME a b a b 


     Which done, the army ecchoes o're,
       Like Gamble Ios one and all,
     And in their various notes implore,
       Long live our noble Generall.

TITLE

RHYME a a *
                    
  If to be absent were to be
      Away from thee;
    Or that when I am gone,
    You or I were alone;
Then my LUCASTA might I crave
Pity from blustring winde or swallowing wave.


RHYME a a *

  But I'le not sigh one blast or gale
      To swell my saile,
    Or pay a teare to swage
    The foaming blew-gods rage;
For whether he will let me passe
Or no, I'm still as happy as I was.


RHYME a a *

  Though seas and land betwixt us both,
      Our faith and troth,
    Like separated soules,
    All time and space controules:
Above the highest sphere wee meet,
Unseene, unknowne, and greet as angels greet

RHYME a a *

  So then we doe anticipate
      Our after-fate,
    And are alive i'th' skies,
    If thus our lips and eyes
Can speake like spirits unconfin'd
In Heav'n, their earthy bodies left behind.

RHYME a b a b 
                    
Tell me not, (sweet,) I am unkinde,
  That from the nunnerie
Of thy chaste breast and quiet minde
  To warre and armes I flie.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

True: a new Mistresse now I chase,
  The first foe in the field;
And with a stronger faith imbrace
  A sword, a horse, a shield.

RHYME a b a b 

Yet this inconstancy is such,
  As you too shall adore;
I could not love thee, dear, so much,
  Lov'd I not Honour more.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c c 

Tis true the beauteous Starre
  To which I first did bow
Burnt quicker, brighter far,
  Than that which leads me now;
    Which shines with more delight,
    For gazing on that light
    So long, neere lost my sight.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

Through foul we follow faire,
  For had the world one face,
And earth been bright as ayre,
  We had knowne neither place.
    Indians smell not their neast;
    A Swisse or Finne tastes best
    The spices of the East.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

So from the glorious Sunne
  Who to his height hath got,
With what delight we runne
  To some black cave or grot!
    And, heav'nly Sydney you
    Twice read, had rather view
    Some odde romance so new.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

The god, that constant keepes
  Unto his deities,
Is poore in joyes, and sleepes
  Imprison'd in the skies.
    This knew the wisest, who
    From Juno stole, below
    To love a bear or cow.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

RHYME a a *

  Amarantha sweet and faire,
Ah brade no more that shining haire!
  As my curious hand or eye,
Hovering round thee, let it flye.

RHYME a a *

  Let it flye as unconfin'd
As it's calme ravisher, the winde,
  Who hath left his darling, th' East,
To wanton o're that spicie neast.

RHYME a a *

  Ev'ry tresse must be confest:
But neatly tangled at the best;
  Like a clue of golden thread,
Most excellently ravelled.

RHYME a a *

  Doe not then winde up that light
In ribands, and o'er-cloud in night,
  Like the sun in's early ray;
But shake your head, and scatter day.

RHYME a a *

  See, 'tis broke! within this grove,
The bower and the walkes of love,
  Weary lye we downe and rest,
And fanne each other's panting breast.

RHYME a a *

  Heere wee'll strippe and coole our fire,
In creame below, in milk-baths higher:
  And when all wells are drawne dry,
I'll drink a teare out of thine eye.

RHYME a a *

  Which our very joys shall leave,
That sorrowes thus we can deceive;
  Or our very sorrowes weepe,
That joyes so ripe so little keepe.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Depose your finger of that ring,
  And crowne mine with't awhile;
Now I restor't.  Pray, dos it bring
  Back with it more of soile?
Or shines it not as innocent,
As honest, as before 'twas lent?

RHYME a a *

So then inrich me with that treasure,
  'Twill but increase your store,
And please me (faire one) with that pleasure
  Must please you still the more.
Not to save others is a curse
The blackest, when y'are ne're the worse.

TITLE

RHYME a a b b 

Sweet serene skye-like flower,
Haste to adorn her bower;
  From thy long clowdy bed
  Shoot forth thy damaske head.

RHYME a a b b 

New-startled blush of FLORA!
The griefe of pale AURORA,
  Who will contest no more,
  Haste, haste, to strowe her floore.

RHYME a a b b 

Vermilion ball, that's given
From lip to lip in Heaven;
  Loves couches cover-led,
  Haste, haste, to make her bed.

RHYME a a b b 

Dear offspring of pleas'd VENUS,
And jollie plumpe SILENUS;
  Haste, haste, to decke the haire,
  Of th' only sweetly faire.

RHYME a a b b 

See! rosie is her bower,
Her floore is all this flower;
  Her bed a rosie nest
  By a bed of roses prest.

RHYME a a b b 

But early as she dresses,
Why fly you her bright tresses?
  Ah! I have found, I feare;
  Because her cheekes are neere.

TITLE

RHYME a b a a b 

The childish god of love did sweare
  Thus: By my awfull bow and quiver,
Yon' weeping, kissing, smiling pair,
I'le scatter all their vowes i' th' ayr,
  And their knit imbraces shiver.

RHYME a b a a b 

Up then to th' head with his best art
  Full of spite and envy blowne,
At her constant marble heart,
He drawes his swiftest surest dart,
  Which bounded back, and hit his owne.

RHYME a b a a b 

Now the prince of fires burnes;
  Flames in the luster of her eyes;
Triumphant she, refuses, scornes;
He submits, adores and mournes,
  And is his votresse sacrifice.

RHYME a b a a b 

Foolish boy! resolve me now
  What 'tis to sigh and not be heard?
He weeping kneel'd, and made a vow:
The world shall love as yon' fast two;
  So on his sing'd wings up he steer'd.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Ah me! the little tyrant theefe!
  As once my heart was playing,
He snatcht it up and flew away,
  Laughing at all my praying.

RHYME a b a b 

Proud of his purchase, he surveys
  And curiously sounds it,
And though he sees it full of wounds,
  Cruel one, still he wounds it.

RHYME a b a b 

And now this heart is all his sport,
  Which as a ball he boundeth
From hand to breast, from breast to lip,
  And all its rest confoundeth.

RHYME a b a b 

Then as a top he sets it up,
  And pitifully whips it;
Sometimes he cloathes it gay and fine,
  Then straight againe he strips it.

RHYME a b a b 

He cover'd it with false reliefe,
  Which gloriously show'd it;
And for a morning-cushionet
  On's mother he bestow'd it.

RHYME a b a b 

Each day, with her small brazen stings,
  A thousand times she rac'd it;
But then at night, bright with her gemmes,
  Once neere her breast she plac'd it.

RHYME a b a b 

There warme it gan to throb and bleed;
  She knew that smart, and grieved;
At length this poore condemned heart
  With these rich drugges repreeved.

RHYME a b a b 

She washt the wound with a fresh teare,
  Which my LUCASTA dropped,
And in the sleave-silke of her haire
  'Twas hard bound up and wrapped.

RHYME a b a b 

She proab'd it with her constancie,
  And found no rancor nigh it;
Only the anger of her eye
  Had wrought some proud flesh by it.

RHYME a b a b 

Then prest she narde in ev'ry veine,
  Which from her kisses trilled;
And with the balme heald all its paine,
  That from her hand distilled.

RHYME a b a b 

But yet this heart avoyds me still,
  Will not by me be owned;
But's fled to its physitian's breast;
  There proudly sits inthroned.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Heark!  Oh heark! you guilty trees,
In whose gloomy galleries
Was the cruell'st murder done,
That e're yet eclipst the sunne.
Be then henceforth in your twigges
Blasted, e're you sprout to sprigges;
Feele no season of the yeere,
But what shaves off all your haire,
Nor carve any from your wombes
Ought but coffins and their tombes.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

When I by thy faire shape did sweare,
And mingled with each vowe a teare,
     I lov'd, I lov'd thee best,
     I swore as I profest.
For all the while you lasted warme and pure,
     My oathes too did endure.
But once turn'd faithlesse to thy selfe and old,
They then with thee incessantly grew cold.

RHYME a a *

I swore my selfe thy sacrifice
By th' ebon bowes that guard thine eyes,
     Which now are alter'd white,
     And by the glorious light
Of both those stars, which of their spheres bereft,
     Only the gellie's left.
Then changed thus, no more I'm bound to you,
Then swearing to a saint that proves untrue.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Lucasta wept, and still the bright
   Inamour'd god of day,
With his soft handkercher of light,
   Kist the wet pearles away.

RHYME a b a b 

But when her teares his heate or'ecame,
   In cloudes he quensht his beames,
And griev'd, wept out his eye of flame,
   So drowned her sad streames.

RHYME a b a b 

At this she smiled, when straight the sun
   Cleer'd by her kinde desires;
And by her eyes reflexion
   Fast kindl'd there his fires.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Long in thy shackels, liberty
I ask not from these walls, but thee;
Left for awhile anothers bride,
To fancy all the world beside.

RHYME a a *

Yet e're I doe begin to love,
See, how I all my objects prove;
Then my free soule to that confine,
'Twere possible I might call mine.

RHYME a a *

First I would be in love with PEACE,
And her rich swelling breasts increase;
But how, alas! how may that be,
Despising earth, she will love me?

RHYME a a *

Faine would I be in love with WAR,
As my deare just avenging star;
But War is lov'd so ev'rywhere,
Ev'n he disdaines a lodging here.

RHYME a a *

Thee and thy wounds I would bemoane,
Faire thorough-shot RELIGION;
But he lives only that kills thee,
And who so bindes thy hands, is free.

RHYME a a *

I would love a PARLIAMENT
As a maine prop from Heav'n sent;
But ah! who's he, that would be wedded
To th' fairest body that's beheaded?

RHYME a a *

Next would I court my LIBERTY,
And then my birth-right, PROPERTY;
But can that be, when it is knowne,
There's nothing you can call your owne?

RHYME a a *

A REFORMATION I would have,
As for our griefes a SOV'RAIGNE salve;
That is, a cleansing of each wheele
Of state, that yet some rust doth feele.

RHYME a a *

But not a reformation so,
As to reforme were to ore'throw,
Like watches by unskilfull men
Disjoynted, and set ill againe.

RHYME a a *

The PUBLICK FAITH I would adore,
But she is banke-rupt of her store:
Nor how to trust her can I see,
For she that couzens all, must me.

RHYME a a *

Since then none of these can be
Fit objects for my love and me;
What then remaines, but th' only spring
Of all our loves and joyes, the King?

RHYME a a *

He who, being the whole ball
Of day on earth, lends it to all;
When seeking to ecclipse his right,
Blinded we stand in our owne light.

RHYME a a *

And now an universall mist
Of error is spread or'e each breast,
With such a fury edg'd as is
Not found in th' inwards of th' abysse.

RHYME a a *

Oh, from thy glorious starry waine
Dispense on me one sacred beame,
To light me where I soone may see
How to serve you, and you trust me!

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Eastrich! thou featherd foole, and easie prey,
  That larger sailes to thy broad vessell needst;
Snakes through thy guttur-neck hisse all the day,
  Then on thy iron messe at supper feedst.

RHYME a b a b 

O what a glorious transmigration
  From this to so divine an edifice
Hast thou straight made! heere from a winged stone
  Transform'd into a bird of paradice!

RHYME a b a b 

Now doe thy plumes for hiew and luster vie
  With th' arch of heav'n that triumphs or'e past wet,
And in a rich enamel'd pinion lye
  With saphyres, amethists and opalls set.

RHYME a b a b 

Sometime they wing her side, <thee> strive to drown
  The day's eyes piercing beames, whose am'rous heat
Sollicites still, 'till with this shield of downe
  From her brave face his glowing fires are beat.

RHYME a b a b 

But whilst a plumy curtaine she doth draw,
  A chrystall mirror sparkles in thy breast,
In which her fresh aspect when as she saw,
  And then her foe retired to the west.

RHYME a b a b 

Deare engine, that oth' sun got'st me the day,
  'Spite of his hot assaults mad'st him retreat!
No wind (said she) dare with thee henceforth play
  But mine own breath to coole the tyrants heat.

RHYME a b a b 

My lively shade thou ever shalt retaine
  In thy inclosed feather-framed glasse,
And but unto our selves to all remaine
  Invisible, thou feature of this face!

RHYME a b a b 

So said, her sad swaine over-heard and cried:
  Yee Gods! for faith unstaind this a reward!
Feathers and glasse t'outweigh my vertue tryed!
  Ah! show their empty strength! the gods accord.

RHYME a b a b 

Now fall'n the brittle favourite lyes and burst!
  Amas'd LUCASTA weepes, repents and flies
To her ALEXIS, vowes her selfe acurst,
  If hence she dresse her selfe but in his eyes.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Yee happy floods! that now must passe
  The sacred conduicts of her wombe,
Smooth and transparent as your face,
  When you are deafe, and windes are dumbe.

RHYME a b a b 

Be proud! and if your waters be
  Foul'd with a counterfeyted teare,
Or some false sigh hath stained yee,
  Haste, and be purified there.

RHYME a b a b 

And when her rosie gates y'have trac'd,
  Continue yet some Orient wet,
'Till, turn'd into a gemme, y'are plac'd
  Like diamonds with rubies set.

RHYME a b a b 

Yee drops, that dew th' Arabian bowers,
  Tell me, did you e're smell or view
On any leafe of all your flowers
  Soe sweet a sent, so rich a hiew?

RHYME a b a b 

But as through th' Organs of her breath
  You trickle wantonly, beware:
Ambitious Seas in their just death
  As well as Lovers, must have share.

RHYME a b a b 

And see! you boyle as well as I;
  You, that to coole her did aspire,
Now troubled and neglected lye,
  Nor can your selves quench your owne fire.

RHYME a b a b 

Yet still be happy in the thought,
  That in so small a time as this,
Through all the Heavens you were brought
  Of Vertue, Honour, Love and Blisse.

TITLE

RHYME a a a a 

Ah LUCASTA, why so bright?
Spread with early streaked light!
If still vailed from our sight,
What is't but eternall night?

RHYME a a a a a 

Ah LUCASTA, why so chaste?
With that vigour, ripenes grac't,
Not to be by Man imbrac't
Makes that Royall coyne imbace't,
And this golden Orchard waste!

RHYME a a a a a 

Ah LUCASTA, why so great,
That thy crammed coffers sweat?
Yet not owner of a seat
May shelter you from Natures heat,
And your earthly joyes compleat.

RHYME a a a a a 

Ah Lucasta, why so good?
Blest with an unstained flood
Flowing both through soule and blood;
If it be not understood,
'Tis a Diamond in mud.

RHYME a a a a a 

LUCASTA! stay! why dost thou flye?
Thou art not bright but to the eye,
Nor chaste but in the mariage-tye,
Nor great but in this treasurie,
Nor good but in that sanctitie.

RHYME a a a a 

Harder then the Orient stone,
Like an apparition,
Or as a pale shadow gone,
Dumbe and deafe she hence is flowne.

RHYME a a a a a 

Then receive this equall dombe:
Virgins, strow no teare or bloome,
No one dig the Parian wombe;
Raise her marble heart i'th' roome,
And 'tis both her coarse and tombe.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

See! what an undisturbed teare
  She weepes for her last sleepe;
But, viewing her, straight wak'd a Star,
  She weepes that she did weepe.

RHYME a b a b 

Griefe ne're before did tyranize
  On th' honour of that brow,
And at the wheeles of her brave eyes
  Was captive led til now.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus, for a saints apostacy
  The unimagin'd woes
And sorrowes of the Hierarchy
  None but an angel knowes.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus, for lost soules recovery
  The clapping of all wings
And triumphs of this victory
  None but an angel sings.

RHYME a b a b 

So none but she knows to bemone
  This equal virgins fate,
None but LUCASTA can her crowne
  Of glory celebrate.

RHYME a b a b 

Then dart on me (CHAST LIGHT) one ray,
  By which I may discry
Thy joy cleare through this cloudy day
  To dresse my sorrow by.

TITLE

RHYME a a b b c c 

Oh, stay that covetous hand; first turn all eye,
All depth and minde; then mystically spye
Her soul's faire picture, her faire soul's, in all
So truely copied from th' originall,
That you will sweare her body by this law
Is but its shadow, as this, its;--now draw.

TITLE

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

Cold as the breath of winds that blow
To silver shot descending snow,
  Lucasta sigh't; when she did close
    The world in frosty chaines!
  And then a frowne to rubies frose
    The blood boyl'd in our veines:
Yet cooled not the heat her sphere
Of beauties first had kindled there.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

Then mov'd, and with a suddaine flame
Impatient to melt all againe,
  Straight from her eyes she lightning hurl'd,
    And earth in ashes mournes;
  The sun his blaze denies the world,
    And in her luster burnes:
Yet warmed not the hearts, her nice
Disdaine had first congeal'd to ice.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

And now her teares nor griev'd desire
Can quench this raging, pleasing fire;
  Fate but one way allowes; behold
    Her smiles' divinity!
  They fann'd this heat, and thaw'd that cold,
    So fram'd up a new sky.
Thus earth, from flames and ice repreev'd,
E're since hath in her sun-shine liv'd.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b a c c 

That frantick errour I adore,
  And am confirm'd the earth turns round;
Now satisfied o're and o're,
  As rowling waves, so flowes the ground,
And as her neighbour reels the shore:
  Finde such a woman says she loves;
  She's that fixt heav'n, which never moves.

RHYME a b a b a c c 

In marble, steele, or porphyrie,
  Who carves or stampes his armes or face,
Lookes it by rust or storme must dye:
  This womans love no time can raze,
Hardned like ice in the sun's eye,
  Or your reflection in a glasse,
  Which keepes possession, though you passe.

RHYME a b a b a c c 

We not behold a watches hand
  To stir, nor plants or flowers to grow;
Must we infer that this doth stand,
  And therefore, that those do not blow?
This she acts calmer, like Heav'ns brand,
  The stedfast lightning, slow loves dart,
  She kils, but ere we feele the smart.

RHYME a b a b a c c 

Oh, she is constant as the winde,
  That revels in an ev'nings aire!
Certaine as wayes unto the blinde,
  More reall then her flatt'ries are;
Gentle as chaines that honour binde,
  More faithfull then an Hebrew Jew,
  But as the divel not halfe so true.

TITLE

RHYME a a a 

From the dire monument of thy black roome,
Wher now that vestal flame thou dost intombe,
As in the inmost cell of all earths wombe.

RHYME a a a 

Sacred Lucasta, like the pow'rfull ray
Of heavenly truth, passe this Cimmerian way,
Whilst all the standards of your beames display.

RHYME a a a 

Arise and climbe our whitest, highest hill;
There your sad thoughts with joy and wonder fill,
And see seas calme as earth, earth as your will.

RHYME a a a 

Behold! how lightning like a taper flyes,
And guilds your chari't, but ashamed dyes,
Seeing it selfe out-gloried by your eyes.

RHYME a a a 

Threatning and boystrous tempests gently bow,
And to your steps part in soft paths, when now
There no where hangs a cloud, but on your brow.

RHYME a a a 

No showrs but 'twixt your lids, nor gelid snow,
But what your whiter, chaster brest doth ow,
Whilst winds in chains colder for sorrow blow.

RHYME a a a 

Shrill trumpets doe only sound to eate,
Artillery hath loaden ev'ry dish with meate,
And drums at ev'ry health alarmes beate.

RHYME a a a 

All things Lucasta, but Lucasta, call,
Trees borrow tongues, waters in accents fall,
The aire doth sing, and fire is musicall.

RHYME a a a 

Awake from the dead vault in which you dwell,
All's loyall here, except your thoughts rebell
Which, so let loose, often their gen'rall quell.

RHYME a a a 

See! she obeys!  By all obeyed thus,
No storms, heats, colds, no soules contentious,
Nor civill war is found; I meane, to us.

RHYME a a a 

Lovers and angels, though in heav'n they show,
And see the woes and discords here below,
What they not feele, must not be said to know.

TITLE     

RHYME a a *

  Up with the jolly bird of light
Who sounds his third retreat to night;
Faire Amarantha from her bed
Ashamed starts, and rises red
As the carnation-mantled morne,
Who now the blushing robe doth spurne,
And puts on angry gray, whilst she,
The envy of a deity,
Arayes her limbes, too rich indeed
To be inshrin'd in such a weed;
Yet lovely 'twas and strait, but fit;
Not made for her, but she to it:
By nature it sate close and free,
As the just bark unto the tree:
Unlike Love's martyrs of the towne,
All day imprison'd in a gown,
Who, rackt in silke 'stead of a dresse,
Are cloathed in a frame or presse,
And with that liberty and room,
The dead expatiate in a tombe.
  No cabinets with curious washes,
Bladders and perfumed plashes;

RHYME a a *

No venome-temper'd water's here,
Mercury is banished this sphere:
Her payle's all this, in which wet glasse
She both doth cleanse and view her face.
  Far hence, all Iberian smells,
Hot amulets, Pomander spells,
Fragrant gales, cool ay'r, the fresh
And naturall odour of her flesh,
Proclaim her sweet from th' wombe as morne.
Those colour'd things were made, not borne.
Which, fixt within their narrow straits,
Do looke like their own counterfeyts.
So like the Provance rose she walkt,
Flowerd with blush, with verdure stalkt;
Th' officious wind her loose hayre curles,
The dewe her happy linnen purles,
But wets a tresse, which instantly
Sol with a crisping beame doth dry.

RHYME a a *

  Into the garden is she come,
Love and delight's Elisium;
If ever earth show'd all her store,
View her discolourd budding floore;
Here her glad eye she largely feedes,
And stands 'mongst them, as they 'mong weeds;
The flowers in their best aray
As to their queen their tribute pay,
And freely to her lap proscribe
A daughter out of ev'ry tribe.
Thus as she moves, they all bequeath
At once the incense of their breath.

RHYME a a *

  The noble Heliotropian
Now turnes to her, and knowes no sun.
  And as her glorious face doth vary,
So opens loyall golden Mary
Who, if but glanced from her sight,
Straight shuts again, as it were night.
The violet (else lost ith' heap)
Doth spread fresh purple for each step,
With whose humility possest,
Sh' inthrones the Poore Girle in her breast:
The July-flow'r that hereto thriv'd,
Knowing her self no longer-liv'd,
But for one look of her upheaves,
Then 'stead of teares straight sheds her leaves.

RHYME a a *

  Now the rich robed Tulip who,
Clad all in tissue close, doth woe
Her (sweet to th' eye but smelling sower),
She gathers to adorn her bower.
  But the proud Hony-suckle spreads
Like a pavilion her heads,
Contemnes the wanting commonalty,
That but to two ends usefull be,
And to her lips thus aptly plac't,
With smell and hue presents her tast.
  So all their due obedience pay,
Each thronging to be in her way:
Faire Amarantha with her eye
Thanks those that live, which else would dye:
The rest, in silken fetters bound,
By crowning her are crown and crown'd.
  And now the sun doth higher rise,
Our Flora to the meadow hies:

RHYME a a *

The poore distressed heifers low,
And as sh' approacheth gently bow,
Begging her charitable leasure
To strip them of their milkie treasure.
  Out of the yeomanry oth' heard,
With grave aspect, and feet prepar'd,
A rev'rend lady-cow drawes neare,
Bids Amarantha welcome here;
And from her privy purse lets fall
A pearle or two, which seeme[s] to call
This adorn'd adored fayry
To the banquet of her dayry.
  Soft Amarantha weeps to see
'Mongst men such inhumanitie,
That those, who do receive in hay,
And pay in silver twice a day,
Should by their cruell barb'rous theft
Be both of that and life bereft.
  But 'tis decreed, when ere this dies,
That she shall fall a sacrifice
Unto the gods, since those, that trace
Her stemme, show 'tis a god-like race,
Descending in an even line
From heifers and from steeres divine,
Making the honour'd extract full
In Io and Europa's bull.
She was the largest goodliest beast,
That ever mead or altar blest;
Round [w]as her udder, and more white
Then is the Milkie Way in night;
Her full broad eye did sparkle fire;
Her breath was sweet as kind desire,
And in her beauteous crescent shone,
Bright as the argent-horned moone.

RHYME a a *

  But see! this whiteness is obscure,
Cynthia spotted, she impure;
Her body writheld, and her eyes
Departing lights at obsequies:
Her lowing hot to the fresh gale,
Her breath perfumes the field withall;
To those two suns that ever shine,
To those plump parts she doth inshrine,
To th' hovering snow of either hand,
That love and cruelty command.
  After the breakfast on her teat,
She takes her leave oth' mournfull neat
Who, by her toucht, now prizeth her life,
Worthy alone the hollowed knife.
  Into the neighbring wood she's gone,
Whose roofe defies the tell-tale Sunne,
And locks out ev'ry prying beame;
Close by the lips of a cleare streame,
She sits and entertaines her eye
With the moist chrystall and the frye
With burnisht-silver mal'd, whose oares
Amazed still make to the shoares;
What need she other bait or charm,
What hook or angle, but her arm?
The happy captive, gladly ta'n,
Sues ever to be slave in vaine,
Who instantly (confirm'd in's feares)
Hasts to his element of teares.
  From hence her various windings roave
To a well-orderd stately grove;

RHYME a a *

This is the pallace of the wood
And court oth' Royall Oake, where stood
The whole nobility: the Pine,
Strait Ash, tall Firre, and wanton Vine;
The proper Cedar, and the rest.
Here she her deeper senses blest;
Admires great Nature in this pile,
Floor'd with greene-velvet Camomile,
Garnisht with gems of unset fruit,
Supply'd still with a self recruit;
Her bosom wrought with pretty eyes
Of never-planted Strawberries;
Where th' winged musick of the ayre
Do richly feast, and for their fare,
Each evening in a silent shade,
Bestow a gratefull serenade.
  Thus ev'n tyerd with delight,
Sated in soul and appetite;
Full of the purple Plumme and Peare,
The golden Apple, with the faire
Grape that mirth fain would have taught her,
And nuts, which squirrells cracking brought her;
She softly layes her weary limbs,
Whilst gentle slumber now beginnes
To draw the curtaines of her eye;
When straight awakend with a crie
And bitter groan, again reposes,
Again a deep sigh interposes.
And now she heares a trembling voyce:
Ah! can there ought on earth rejoyce!
Why weares she this gay livery,
Not black as her dark entrails be?

RHYME a a *

Can trees be green, and to the ay'r
Thus prostitute their flowing hayr?
Why do they sprout, not witherd dy?
Must each thing live, save wretched I?
Can dayes triumph in blew and red,
When both their light and life is fled?
Fly Joy on wings of Popinjayes
To courts of fools, where as your playes
Dye laught at and forgot; whilst all
That's good mourns at this funerall.
Weep, all ye Graces, and you sweet
Quire, that at the hill inspir'd meet:
Love, put thy tapers out, that we
And th' world may seem as blind as thee;
And be, since she is lost (ah wound!)
Not Heav'n it self by any found.
  Now as a prisoner new cast,
Who sleepes in chaines that night, his last,
Next morn is wak't with a repreeve,
And from his trance, not dream bid live,
Wonders (his sence not having scope)
Who speaks, his friend or his false hope.
  So Amarantha heard, but feare
Dares not yet trust her tempting care;
And as againe her arms oth' ground
Spread pillows for her head, a sound
More dismall makes a swift divorce,
And starts her thus:----Rage, rapine, force!
Ye blew-flam'd daughters oth' abysse,
Bring all your snakes, here let them hisse;

RHYME a a *

Let not a leaf its freshnesse keep;
Blast all their roots, and as you creepe,
And leave behind your deadly slime,
Poyson the budding branch in's prime:
Wast the proud bowers of this grove,
That fiends may dwell in it, and move
As in their proper hell, whilst she
Above laments this tragedy:
Yet pities not our fate; oh faire
Vow-breaker, now betroth'd to th' ay'r!
Why by those lawes did we not die,
As live but one, Lucasta! why----
As he Lucasta nam'd, a groan
Strangles the fainting passing tone;
But as she heard, Lucasta smiles,
Posses her round; she's slipt mean whiles
Behind the blind of a thick bush,
When, each word temp'ring with a blush,
She gently thus bespake; Sad swaine,
If mates in woe do ease our pain,
Here's one full of that antick grief,
Which stifled would for ever live,
But told, expires; pray then, reveale
(To show our wound is half to heale),
What mortall nymph or deity
Bewail you thus?  Who ere you be,
The shepheard sigh't, my woes I crave
Smotherd in me, me in my grave;
Yet be in show or truth a saint,
Or fiend, breath anthemes, heare my plaint,
For her and thy breath's symphony,
Which now makes full the harmony

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Above, and to whose voice the spheres
Listen, and call her musick theirs;
This was I blest on earth with, so
As Druids amorous did grow,
Jealous of both: for as one day
This star, as yet but set in clay,

RHYME a a *

They steept her in the hollowed brooke,
Which from her humane nature tooke,
And straight to heaven with winged feare,
Thus, ravisht with her, ravish her.
  The nymph reply'd: This holy rape
Became the gods, whose obscure shape
They cloth'd with light, whilst ill you grieve
Your better life should ever live,

RHYME a a *

And weep that she, to whom you wish
What heav'n could give, has all its blisse.
Calling her angell here, yet be
Sad at this true divinity:
She's for the altar, not the skies,
Whom first you crowne, then sacrifice.
  Fond man thus to a precipice
Aspires, till at the top his eyes
Have lost the safety of the plain,
Then begs of Fate the vales againe.
  The now confounded shepheard cries:
Ye all-confounding destines!
How did you make that voice so sweet
Without that glorious form to it?
Thou sacred spirit of my deare,
Where e're thou hoverst o're us, hear!
Imbark thee in the lawrell tree,
And a new Phebus follows thee,
Who, 'stead of all his burning rayes,
Will strive to catch thee with his layes;

RHYME a a *

Or, if within the Orient Vine,
Thou art both deity and wine;
But if thou takest the mirtle grove,
That Paphos is, thou, Queene of Love,
And I, thy swain who (else) must die,
By no beasts, but thy cruelty:
But you are rougher than the winde.
Are souls on earth then heav'n more kind?
Imprisoned in mortality
Lucasta would have answered me.
Lucasta, Amarantha said,
Is she that virgin-star? a maid,
Except her prouder livery,
In beauty poore, and cheap as I;
Whose glory like a meteor shone,
Or aery apparition,
Admir'd a while, but slighted known.
  Fierce, as the chafed lyon hies,
He rowses him, and to her flies,
Thinking to answer with his speare----
  Now, as in warre intestine where,
Ith' mist of a black battell, each
Layes at his next, then makes a breach
Through th' entrayles of another, whom
He sees nor knows whence he did come,
Guided alone by rage and th' drumme,
But stripping and impatient wild,
He finds too soon his onely child.
  So our expiring desp'rate lover
Far'd when, amaz'd, he did discover

RHYME a a *

Lucasta in this nymph; his sinne
Darts the accursed javelin
'Gainst his own breast, which she puts by
With a soft lip and gentle eye,
Then closes with him on the ground
And now her smiles have heal'd his wound.

RHYME a a *

But not untill those heavy crimes
She hath kis'd off a thousand times,
Who not contented with this pain,
Doth threaten to offend again.
  And now they gaze, and sigh, and weep,
Whilst each cheek doth the other's steep,
Whilst tongues, as exorcis'd, are calm;
Onely the rhet'rick of the palm
Prevailing pleads, untill at last
They[re] chain'd in one another fast.
Lucasta to him doth relate
Her various chance and diffring fate:
How chac'd by Hydraphil, and tract
The num'rous foe to Philanact,

RHYME a a *

Who whilst they for the same things fight,
As Bards decrees and Druids rite,
For safeguard of their proper joyes
And shepheards freedome, each destroyes
The glory of this Sicilie;
Since seeking thus the remedie,
They fancy (building on false ground)
The means must them and it confound,
Yet are resolved to stand or fall,
And win a little, or lose all.

RHYME a a *

  From this sad storm of fire and blood
She fled to this yet living wood;
Where she 'mongst savage beasts doth find
Her self more safe then humane kind.
  Then she relates, how Caelia--
The lady--here strippes her array,
And girdles her in home-spunne bayes
Then makes her conversant in layes
Of birds, and swaines more innocent,
That kenne not guile [n]or courtship ment.

RHYME a a *

  Now walks she to her bow'r to dine
Under a shade of Eglantine,
Upon a dish of Natures cheere
Which both grew, drest and serv'd up there:
That done, she feasts her smell with po'ses
Pluckt from the damask cloath of Roses.
Which there continually doth stay,
And onely frost can take away;
Then wagers which hath most content
Her eye, eare, hand, her gust or sent.
  Intranc't Alexis sees and heares,
As walking above all the spheres:
Knows and adores this, and is wilde,
Untill with her he live thus milde.
So that, which to his thoughts he meant
For losse of her a punishment,
His armes hung up and his sword broke,
His ensignes folded, he betook
Himself unto the humble crook.
And for a full reward of all,
She now doth him her shepheard call,
And in a see of flow'rs install:
Then gives her faith immediately,
Which he returns religiously;

RHYME a a *

Both vowing in her peacefull cave
To make their bridall-bed and grave.
  But the true joy this pair conceiv'd,
Each from the other first bereav'd,
And then found, after such alarmes,
Fast-pinion'd in each other's armes,
Ye panting virgins, that do meet
Your loves within their winding sheet,
Breathing and constant still ev'n there;
Or souls their bodies in yon' sphere,
Or angels, men return'd from hell
And separated mindes--can tell.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

If in me anger, or disdaine
In you, or both, made me refraine
From th' noble intercourse of verse,
That only vertuous thoughts rehearse;
  Then, chaste Ellinda, might you feare
  The sacred vowes that I did sweare.

RHYME a a *

But if alone some pious thought
Me to an inward sadnesse brought,
Thinking to breath your soule too welle,
My tongue was charmed with that spell;
  And left it (since there was no roome
  To voyce your worth enough) strooke dumbe.

RHYME a a *

So then this silence doth reveal
No thought of negligence, but zeal:
For, as in adoration,
This is love's true devotion;
  Children and fools the words repeat,
  But anch'rites pray in tears and sweat.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b b 

Thou snowy farme with thy five tenements!
    Tell thy white mistris here was one,
    That call'd to pay his dayly rents;
But she a-gathering flowr's and hearts is gone,
And thou left voyd to rude possession.

RHYME a b a b b 

But grieve not, pretty Ermin cabinet,
    Thy alabaster lady will come home;
    If not, what tenant can there fit
The slender turnings of thy narrow roome,
But must ejected be by his owne dombe?

RHYME a b a b b 

Then give me leave to leave my rent with thee:
    Five kisses, one unto a place:
    For though the lute's too high for me,
Yet servants, knowing minikin nor base,
Are still allow'd to fiddle with the case.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  For cherries plenty, and for corans
Enough for fifty, were there more on's;
For elles of beere, flutes of canary,
That well did wash downe pasties-Mary;
For peason, chickens, sawces high,
Pig, and the widdow-venson-pye;
With certaine promise (to your brother)
Of the virginity of another,
Where it is thought I too may peepe in
With knuckles far as any deepe in;
For glasses, heads, hands, bellies full
Of wine, and loyne right-worshipfull;
Whether all of, or more behind--a
Thankes freest, freshest, faire Ellinda.

RHYME a a *

Thankes for my visit not disdaining,
Or at the least thankes for your feigning;
For if your mercy doore were lockt-well,
I should be justly soundly knockt-well;
Cause that in dogrell I did mutter
Not one rhime to you from dam-Rotter.

RHYME a a *

  Next beg I to present my duty
To pregnant sister in prime beauty,
Whom well I deeme (e're few months elder)
Will take out Hans from pretty Kelder,
And to the sweetly fayre Mabella,
A match that vies with Arabella;
In each respect but the misfortune,
Fortune, Fate, I thee importune.

RHYME a a *

  Nor must I passe the lovely Alice,
Whose health I'd quaffe in golden chalice;
But since that Fate hath made me neuter,
I only can in beaker pewter:
But who'd forget, or yet left un-sung
The doughty acts of George the yong-son?

RHYME a a *

Who yesterday to save his sister
Had slaine the snake, had he not mist her:
But I shall leave him, 'till a nag on
He gets to prosecute the dragon;
And then with helpe of sun and taper,
Fill with his deeds twelve reames of paper,
That Amadis, Sir Guy, and Topaz
With his fleet neigher shall keep no-pace.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

How I grieve that I am well!
  All my health was in my sicknes,
Go then, Destiny, and tell,
  Very death is in this quicknes.

RHYME a b a b 

Such a fate rules over me,
  That I glory when I languish,
And do blesse the remedy,
  That doth feed, not quench my anguish.

RHYME a b a b 

'Twas a gentle warmth that ceas'd
  In the vizard of a feavor;
But I feare now I am eas'd
  All the flames, since I must leave her.

RHYME a b a b 

Joyes, though witherd, circled me,
  When unto her voice inured
Like those who, by harmony,
  Only can be throughly cured.

RHYME a b a b 

Sweet, sure, was that malady,
  Whilst the pleasant angel hover'd,
Which ceasing they are all, as I,
  Angry that they are recover'd.

RHYME a b a b 

And as men in hospitals,
  That are maim'd, are lodg'd and dined;
But when once their danger fals,
  Ah th' are healed to be pined!

RHYME a b a b 

Fainting so, I might before
  Sometime have the leave to hand her,
But lusty, am beat out of dore,
  And for Love compell'd to wander.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  It was Amyntor's Grove, that Chloris
For ever ecchoes, and her glories;
Chloris, the gentlest sheapherdesse,
That ever lawnes and lambes did blesse;
Her breath, like to the whispering winde,
Was calme as thought, sweet as her minde;
Her lips like coral gates kept in
The perfume and the pearle within;
Her eyes a double-flaming torch
That alwayes shine, and never scorch;
Her selfe the Heav'n in which did meet
The all of bright, of faire and sweet.
  Here was I brought with that delight
That seperated soules take flight;
And when my reason call'd my sence
Back somewhat from this excellence,

RHYME a a *

That I could see, I did begin
T' observe the curious ordering
Of every roome, where 'ts hard to know,
Which most excels in sent or show.
Arabian gummes do breathe here forth,
And th' East's come over to the North;
The windes have brought their hyre of sweet
To see Amyntor Chloris greet;
Balme and nard, and each perfume,
To blesse this payre, chafe and consume;
And th' Phoenix, see! already fries!
Her neast a fire in Chloris eyes!
  Next the great and powerful hand
Beckens my thoughts unto a stand
Of Titian, Raphael, Georgone
Whose art even Nature hath out-done;
For if weake Nature only can
Intend, not perfect, what is man,
These certainely we must prefer,
Who mended what she wrought, and her;

RHYME a a *

And sure the shadowes of those rare
And kind incomparable fayre
Are livelier, nobler company,
Then if they could or speake, or see:
For these I aske without a tush,
Can kisse or touch without a blush,
And we are taught that substance is,
If uninjoy'd, but th' shade of blisse.
  Now every saint cleerly divine,
Is clos'd so in her severall shrine;
The gems so rarely, richly set,
For them wee love the cabinet;

RHYME a a *

So intricately plac't withall,
As if th' imbrordered the wall,
So that the pictures seem'd to be
But one continued tapistrie.
  After this travell of mine eyes
We sate, and pitied Dieties;
Wee bound our loose hayre with the vine,
The poppy, and the eglantine;
One swell'd an oriental bowle
Full, as a grateful, loyal soule
To Chloris!  Chloris!  Heare, oh, heare!
'Tis pledg'd above in ev'ry sphere.
  Now streight the Indians richest prize
Is kindled in glad sacrifice;
Cloudes are sent up on wings of thyme,
Amber, pomgranates, jessemine,
And through our earthen conduicts sore
Higher then altars fum'd before.
  So drencht we our oppressing cares,
And choakt the wide jawes of our feares.
Whilst ravisht thus we did devise,
If this were not a Paradice
In all, except these harmlesse sins:
Behold! flew in two cherubins,
Cleare as the skye from whence they came,
And brighter than the sacred flame;
The boy adorn'd with modesty,
Yet armed so with majesty,
That if the Thunderer againe
His eagle sends, she stoops in vaine.

RHYME a a *

Besides his innocence he tooke
A sword and casket, and did looke
Like Love in armes; he wrote but five,
Yet spake eighteene; each grace did strive,
And twenty Cupids thronged forth,
Who first should shew his prettier worth.
But oh, the Nymph!  Did you ere know
Carnation mingled with snow?
Or have you seene the lightning shrowd,
And straight breake through th' opposing cloud?
So ran her blood; such was its hue;
So through her vayle her bright haire flew,
And yet its glory did appeare
But thinne, because her eyes were neere.
  Blooming boy, and blossoming mayd,
May your faire sprigges be neere betray'd

RHYME a a *

To eating worme or fouler storme;
No serpent lurke to do them harme;
No sharpe frost cut, no North-winde teare,
The verdure of that fragrant hayre;
But may the sun and gentle weather,
When you are both growne ripe together,
Load you with fruit, such as your Father
From you with all the joyes doth gather:
And may you, when one branch is dead,
Graft such another in its stead,
Lasting thus ever in your prime,
'Till th' sithe is snatcht away from Time.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b b 

Why shouldst thou sweare I am forsworn,
  Since thine I vow'd to be?
Lady, it is already Morn,
  And 'twas last night I swore to thee
  That fond impossibility.

RHYME a b a b b 

Have I not lov'd thee much and long,
  A tedious twelve moneths space?
I should all other beauties wrong,
  And rob thee of a new imbrace;
  Should I still dote upon thy face.

RHYME a b a b b 

Not but all joy in thy browne haire
  In others may be found;
But I must search the black and faire,
  Like skilfulle minerallists that sound
  For treasure in un-plow'd-up ground.

RHYME a b a b b 

Then if, when I have lov'd my round,
  Thou prov'st the pleasant she;
With spoyles of meaner beauties crown'd,
  I laden will returne to thee,
  Ev'n sated with varietie.

TITLE

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e e f f 

  I saw a little Diety,
MINERVA in epitomy,
Whom VENUS, at first blush, surpris'd,
Tooke for her winged wagge disguis'd.
But viewing then, whereas she made
Not a distrest, but lively shade
Of ECCHO whom he had betrayd,
Now wanton, and ith' coole oth' Sunne
With her delight a hunting gone,
And thousands more, whom he had slaine;
To live and love, belov'd againe:
Ah! this is true divinity!
I will un-God that toye! cri'd she;

RHYME a a *

Then markt she SYRINX running fast
To Pan's imbraces, with the haste
Shee fled him once, whose reede-pipe rent
He finds now a new Instrument.
THESEUS return'd invokes the Ayre
And windes, then wafts his faire;
Whilst ARIADNE ravish't stood
Half in his armes, halfe in the flood.
  Proud ANAXERETE doth fall
At IPHIS feete, who smiles at all:
And he (whilst she his curles doth deck)
Hangs no where now, but on her neck.
Here PHOEBUS with a beame untombes
Long-hid LEUCOTHOE, and doomes
Her father there; DAPHNE the faire
Knowes now no bayes but round her haire;

RHYME a a *

And to APOLLO and his Sons,
Who pay him their due Orisons,
Bequeaths her lawrell-robe, that flame
Contemnes, Thunder and evill Fame.
  There kneel'd ADONIS fresh as spring,
Gay as his youth, now offering
Herself those joyes with voice and hand,
Which first he could not understand.
  Transfixed VENUS stood amas'd,
Full of the Boy and Love, she gaz'd,
And in imbraces seemed more
Senceless and colde then he before.
Uselesse Childe!  In vaine (said she)
You beare that fond artillerie;
See heere a pow'r above the slow
Weake execution of thy bow.
  So said, she riv'd the wood in two,
Unedged all his arrowes too,

RHYME a a *

And with the string their feathers bound
To that part, whence we have our wound.
  See, see! the darts by which we burn'd
Are bright Loysa's pencills turn'd,
With which she now enliveth more
Beauties, than they destroy'd before.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Were it that you so shun me, 'cause you wish
(Cruels't) a fellow in your wretchednesse,
Or that you take some small ease in your owne
Torments, to heare another sadly groane,
I were most happy in my paines, to be
So truely blest, to be so curst by thee:
But oh! my cries to that doe rather adde,
Of which too much already thou hast had,
And thou art gladly sad to heare my moane;
Yet sadly hearst me with derision.

RHYME a a *

  Thou most unjust, that really dust know,
And feelst thyselfe the flames I burne in.  Oh!
How can you beg to be set loose from that
Consuming stake you binde another at?

RHYME a a *

  Uncharitablest both wayes, to denie
That pity me, for which yourself must dye,
To love not her loves you, yet know the pain
What 'tis to love, and not be lov'd againe.

RHYME a a *

  Flye on, flye on, swift Racer, untill she
Whom thou of all ador'st shall learne of thee
The pace t'outfly thee, and shall teach thee groan,
What terrour 'tis t'outgo and be outgon.

RHYME a a *

  Nor yet looke back, nor yet must we
Run then like spoakes in wheeles eternally,
And never overtake?  Be dragg'd on still
By the weake cordage of your untwin'd will
Round without hope of rest?  No, I will turne,
And with my goodnes boldly meete your scorne;

RHYME a a *

My goodnesse which Heav'n pardon, and that fate
MADE YOU HATE LOVE, AND FALL IN LOVE WITH HATE.

RHYME a a *

  But I am chang'd!  Bright reason, that did give
My soule a noble quicknes, made me live
One breath yet longer, and to will, and see
Hath reacht me pow'r to scorne as well as thee:
That thou, which proudly tramplest on my grave,
Thyselfe mightst fall, conquer'd my double slave:
That thou mightst, sinking in thy triumphs, moan,
And I triumph in my destruction.

RHYME a a *

  Hayle, holy cold! chaste temper, hayle! the fire
Rav'd o're my purer thoughts I feel t' expire,
And I am candied ice.  Yee pow'rs! if e're
I shall be forc't unto my sepulcher,
Or violently hurl'd into my urne,
Oh make me choose rather to freeze than burne.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Oh thou, that swing'st upon the waving eare
  Of some well-filled oaten beard,
Drunk ev'ry night with a delicious teare
  Dropt thee from Heav'n, where now th'art reard.

RHYME a b a b 

The joyes of earth and ayre are thine intire,
  That with thy feet and wings dost hop and flye;
And when thy poppy workes, thou dost retire
  To thy carv'd acorn-bed to lye.

RHYME a b a b 

Up with the day, the Sun thou welcomst then,
  Sportst in the guilt plats of his beames,
And all these merry dayes mak'st merry men,
  Thy selfe, and melancholy streames.

RHYME a b a b 

But ah, the sickle! golden eares are cropt;
  CERES and BACCHUS bid good-night;
Sharpe frosty fingers all your flowrs have topt,
  And what sithes spar'd, winds shave off quite.

RHYME a b a b 

Poore verdant foole! and now green ice, thy joys
  Large and as lasting as thy peirch of grasse,
Bid us lay in 'gainst winter raine, and poize
  Their flouds with an o'erflowing glasse.

RHYME a b a b 

Thou best of men and friends? we will create
  A genuine summer in each others breast;
And spite of this cold Time and frosen Fate,
  Thaw us a warme seate to our rest.

RHYME a b a b 

Our sacred harthes shall burne eternally
  As vestal flames; the North-wind, he
Shall strike his frost-stretch'd winges, dissolve and flye
  This Aetna in epitome.

RHYME a b a b 

Dropping December shall come weeping in,
  Bewayle th' usurping of his raigne;
But when in show'rs of old Greeke we beginne,
  Shall crie, he hath his crowne againe!

RHYME a b a b 

Night as cleare Hesper shall our tapers whip
  From the light casements, where we play,
And the darke hagge from her black mantle strip,
  And sticke there everlasting day.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus richer then untempted kings are we,
  That asking nothing, nothing need:
Though lord of all what seas imbrace, yet he
  That wants himselfe, is poore indeed.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Hither with hallowed steps as is the ground,
That must enshrine this saint with lookes profound,
And sad aspects as the dark vails you weare,
Virgins opprest, draw gently, gently neare;
Enter the dismall chancell of this rooome,
Where each pale guest stands fixt a living tombe;
With trembling hands helpe to remove this earth
To its last death and first victorious birth:
Let gums and incense fume, who are at strife
To enter th' hearse and breath in it new life;
Mingle your steppes with flowers as you goe,
Which, as they haste to fade, will speake your woe.

RHYME a a *

  And when y' have plac't your tapers on her urn,
How poor a tribute 'tis to weep and mourn!
That flood the channell of your eye-lids fils,
When you lose trifles, or what's lesse, your wills.

RHYME a a *

If you'l be worthy of these obsequies,
Be blind unto the world, and drop your eyes;
Waste and consume, burn downward as this fire
That's fed no more: so willingly expire;

RHYME a a *

Passe through the cold and obscure narrow way,
Then light your torches at the spring of day,

RHYME a a a 

There with her triumph in your victory.
Such joy alone and such solemnity
Becomes this funerall of virginity.

RHYME a a *

  Or, if you faint to be so blest, oh heare!
If not to dye, dare but to live like her:
Dare to live virgins, till the honour'd age
Of thrice fifteen cals matrons on the stage,
Whilst not a blemish or least staine is scene
On your white roabe 'twixt fifty and fifteene;
But as it in your swathing-bands was given,
Bring't in your winding sheet unsoyl'd to Heav'n.
Daere to do purely, without compact good,
Or herald, by no one understood
But him, who now in thanks bows either knee
For th' early benefit and secresie.

RHYME a a *

  Dare to affect a serious holy sorrow,
To which delights of pallaces are narrow,
And, lasting as their smiles, dig you a roome,
Where practise the probation of your tombe
With ever-bended knees and piercing pray'r,
Smooth the rough passe through craggy earth to ay'r;

RHYME a a *

May put in safely, and secure their feares,
Who, adding to your joyes, now owe you theirs.

RHYME a a *

  Virgins, if thus you dare but courage take
To follow her in life, else through this lake
Of Nature wade, and breake her earthly bars,
Y' are fixt with her upon a throne of stars,
Arched with a pure Heav'n chrystaline,
Where round you love and joy for ever shine.

RHYME a a *

  But you are dumbe, as what you do lament
More senseles then her very monument,
Which at your weaknes weeps.  Spare that vaine teare,
Enough to burst the rev'rend sepulcher.
Rise and walk home; there groaning prostrate fall,
And celebrate your owne sad funerall:
For howsoe're you move, may heare, or see,
YOU ARE MORE DEAD AND BURIED THEN SHEE.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  You that shall live awhile, before
Old time tyrs, and is no more:
When that this ambitious stone
Stoopes low as what it tramples on:
Know that in that age, when sinne
Gave the world law, and governd Queene,
A virgin liv'd, that still put on
White thoughts, though out of fashion:

RHYME a a *

That trac't the stars, 'spite of report,
And durst be good, though chidden for't:
Of such a soule that infant Heav'n
Repented what it thus had giv'n:
For finding equall happy man,
Th' impatient pow'rs snatch it agen.
Thus, chaste as th' ayre whither shee's fled,
She, making her celestiall bed
In her warme alablaster, lay
As cold is in this house of clay:
Nor were the rooms unfit to feast
Or circumscribe this angel-guest;

RHYME a a *

The radiant gemme was brightly set
In as divine a carkanet;
Of which the clearer was not knowne,
Her minde or her complexion.
Such an everlasting grace,
Such a beatifick face,
Incloysters here this narrow floore,
That possest all hearts before.

RHYME a a *

  Blest and bewayl'd in death and birth!
The smiles and teares of heav'n and earth!
Virgins at each step are afeard,
Filmer is shot by which they steer'd,
Their star extinct, their beauty dead,
That the yong world to honour led;
But see! the rapid spheres stand still,
And tune themselves unto her will.

RHYME a a *

  Thus, although this marble must,
As all things, crumble into dust,
And though you finde this faire-built tombe
Ashes, as what lyes in its wombe:
Yet her saint-like name shall shine
A living glory to this shrine,
And her eternall fame be read,
When all but VERY VERTUE'S DEAD.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  See! what a clouded majesty, and eyes
Whose glory through their mist doth brighter rise!
  See! what an humble bravery doth shine,
And griefe triumphant breaking through each line,
How it commands the face! so sweet a scorne
Never did HAPPY MISERY adorne!

RHYME a a *

So sacred a contempt, that others show
To this, (oth' height of all the wheele) below,
That mightiest monarchs by this shaded booke
May coppy out their proudest, richest looke.

RHYME a a *

  Whilst the true eaglet this quick luster spies,
And by his SUN'S enlightens his owne eyes;
He cures his cares, his burthen feeles, then streight
Joyes that so lightly he can beare such weight;
Whilst either eithers passion doth borrow,
And both doe grieve the same victorious sorrow.

RHYME a a *

  These, my best LILLY, with so bold a spirit
And soft a grace, as if thou didst inherit
For that time all their greatnesse, and didst draw
With those brave eyes your royal sitters saw.

RHYME a a *

  Not as of old, when a rough hand did speake
A strong aspect, and a faire face, a weake;
When only a black beard cried villaine, and
By hieroglyphicks we could understand;
When chrystall typified in a white spot,
And the bright ruby was but one red blot;
Thou dost the things Orientally the same
Not only paintst its colour, but its flame:

RHYME a a *

Thou sorrow canst designe without a teare,
And with the man his very hope or feare;
So that th' amazed world shall henceforth finde
None but my LILLY ever drew a MINDE.

RHYME a a *

  With that delight the Royal captiv's brought
Before the throne, to breath his farewell thought,
To tel his last tale, and so end with it,
Which gladly he esteemes a benefit;
When the brave victor, at his great soule dumbe,
Findes something there fate cannot overcome,
Cals the chain'd prince, and by his glory led,
First reaches him his crowne, and then his head;
Who ne're 'til now thinks himself slave and poor;
For though nought else, he had himselfe before.
He weepes at this faire chance, nor wil allow,
But that the diadem doth brand his brow,

RHYME a a *

And under-rates himselfe below mankinde,
Who first had lost his body, now his minde,

RHYME a a *

  With such a joy came I to heare my dombe,
And haste the preparation of my tombe,
When, like good angels who have heav'nly charge
To steere and guide mans sudden giddy barge,
She snatcht me from the rock I was upon,
And landed me at life's pavillion:
Where I, thus wound out of th' immense abysse,
Was straight set on a pinacle of blisse.

RHYME a a *

  Let me leape in againe! and by that fall
Bring me to my first woe, so cancel all:
Ah! 's this a quitting of the debt you owe,
To crush her and her goodnesse at one blowe?
  Defend me from so foule impiety,
Would make friends grieve, and furies weep to see.

RHYME a a *

  Now, ye sage spirits, which infuse in men
That are oblidg'd twice to oblige agen,
Informe my tongue in labour what to say,
And in what coyne or language to repay.
But you are silent as the ev'nings ayre,
When windes unto their hollow grots repaire.
  Oh, then accept the all that left me is,
Devout oblations of a sacred wish!

RHYME a a *

  When she walks forth, ye perfum'd wings oth' East,
Fan her, 'til with the Sun she hastes to th' West,
And when her heav'nly course calles up the day,
And breakes as bright, descend, some glistering ray,
To circle her, and her as glistering haire,
That all may say a living saint shines there.

RHYME a a *

Slow Time, with woollen feet make thy soft pace,
And leave no tracks ith' snow of her pure face;
But when this vertue must needs fall, to rise
The brightest constellation in the skies;
When we in characters of fire shall reade,
How cleere she was alive, how spotless, dead.
All you that are a kinne to piety:
For onely you can her close mourners be,
Draw neer, and make of hallowed teares a dearth:
Goodnes and justice both are fled the earth.

RHYME a a *

  If this be to be thankful, I'v a heart
Broaken with vowes, eaten with grateful smart,
And beside this, the vild world nothing hath
Worth anything but her provoked wrath;
So then, who thinkes to satisfie in time,
Must give a satisfaction for that crime:
Since she alone knowes the gifts value, she
Can onely to her selfe requitall be,

RHYME a a *

And worthyly to th' life paynt her owne story
In its true colours and full native glory;
Which when perhaps she shal be heard to tell,
Buffoones and theeves, ceasing to do ill,
Shal blush into a virgin-innocence,
And then woo others from the same offence;
The robber and the murderer, in 'spite
Of his red spots, shal startle into white:
All good (rewards layd by) shal stil increase
For love of her, and villany decease;
Naught be ignote, not so much out of feare
Of being punisht, as offending her.

RHYME a a *

  So that, when as my future daring bayes
Shall bow it selfe in lawrels to her praise,
To crown her conqu'ring goodnes, and proclaime
The due renowne and glories of her name:
My wit shal be so wretched and so poore
That, 'stead of praysing, I shal scandal her,
And leave, when with my purest art I'v done,
Scarce the designe of what she is begunne:
Yet men shal send me home, admir'd, exact;
Proud, that I could from her so wel detract.

RHYME a a *

  Where, then, thou bold instinct, shal I begin
My endlesse taske?  To thanke her were a sin
Great as not speake, and not to speake, a blame
Beyond what's worst, such as doth want a name;
So thou my all, poore gratitude, ev'n thou
In this wilt an unthankful office do:

RHYME a a *

Or wilt I fling all at her feet I have:
My life, my love, my very soule, a slave?
Tye my free spirit onely unto her,
And yeeld up my affection prisoner?
Fond thought, in this thou teachest me to give
What first was hers, since by her breath I live;
And hast but show'd me, how I may resigne
Possession of those thing are none of mine.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

This Queen of Prey (now prey to you),
  Fast to that pirch of ivory
In silver chaines and silken clue,
  Hath now made full thy victory:

RHYME a b a b 

The swelling admirall of the dread
  Cold deepe, burnt in thy flames, oh faire!
Wast not enough, but thou must lead
  Bound, too, the Princesse of the aire?

RHYME a b a b 

Unarm'd of wings and scaly oare,
  Unhappy crawler on the land,
To what heav'n fly'st? div'st to what shoare,
  That her brave eyes do not command?

RHYME a b a b 

Ascend the chariot of the Sun
  From her bright pow'r to shelter thee:
Her captive (foole) outgases him;
  Ah, what lost wretches then are we!

RHYME a b a b 

Now, proud usurpers on the right
  Of sacred beauty, heare your dombe;
Recant your sex, your mastry, might;
  Lower you cannot be or'ecome:

RHYME a b a b 

Repent, ye er'e nam'd he or head,
  For y' are in falcon's monarchy,
And in that just dominion bred,
  In which the nobler is the shee.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  A gentleman, to give us somewhat new,
Hath brought up OXFORD with him to show you;
Pray be not frighted--Tho the scaene and gown's
The Universities, the wit's the town's;
The lines each honest Englishman may speake:
Yet not mistake his mother-tongue for Greeke,
For stil 'twas part of his vow'd liturgie:--
From learned comedies deliver me!
Wishing all those that lov'd 'em here asleepe,
Promising SCHOLARS, but no SCHOLARSHIP.

RHYME a a *

  You'd smile to see, how he do's vex and shake,
Speakes naught; but, if the PROLOGUE do's but take,
Or the first act were past the pikes once, then--
Then hopes and joys, then frowns and fears agen,
Then blushes like a virgin, now to be
Rob'd of his comicall virginity
In presence of you all.  In short, you'd say
More hopes of mirth are in his looks then play.

RHYME a a *

  These feares are for the noble and the wise;
But if 'mongst you there are such fowle dead eyes,
As can damne unaraign'd, cal law their pow'rs,
Judging it sin enough that it is ours,
And with the house shift their decreed desires,
FAIRE still to th' BLACKE, BLACKE still to the WHITE-FRYERS;

RHYME a a *

So far from quarr'lling with himselfe and wit,
That he wil thank them for the benefit,
Since finding nothing worthy of their hate,
They reach him that themselves must envy at:

RHYME a a *

  The stubborne author of the trifle crime,
That just now cheated you of two hours' time,
Presumptuous it lik't him, began to grow
Carelesse, whether it pleased you or no.

RHYME a a *

  But we who ground th' excellence of a play
On what the women at the dores wil say,
Who judge it by the benches, and afford
To take your money, ere his oath or word
His SCHOLLARS school'd, sayd if he had been wise
He should have wove in one two COMEDIES;

RHYME a a *

The first for th' gallery, in which the throne
To their amazement should descend alone,
The rosin-lightning flash, and monster spire
Squibs, and words hotter then his fire.

RHYME a a *

  Th' other for the gentlemen oth' pit,
Like to themselves, all spirit, fancy, wit,
In which plots should be subtile as a flame,
Disguises would make PROTEUS stil the same:
Humours so rarely humour'd and exprest,
That ev'n they should thinke 'em so, not drest;
Vices acted and applauded too, times
Tickled, and th' actors acted, not their crimes,
So he might equally applause have gain'd
Of th' hardned, sooty, and the snowy hand.

RHYME a a *

  Where now one SO SO spatters, t'other: no!
Tis his first play; twere solecisme 'tshould goe;
The next 't show'd pritily, but searcht within
It appeares bare and bald, as is his chin;
The towne-wit sentences: A SCHOLARS PLAY!
Pish!  I know not why, but th'ave not the way.

RHYME a a *

  We, whose gaine is all our pleasure, ev'n these
Are bound by justice and religion to please;
Which he, whose pleasure's all his gaine, goes by
As slightly, as they doe his comaedy.

RHYME a a *

  Culls out the few, the worthy, at whose feet
He sacrifices both himselfe and it,
His fancies first fruits: profit he knowes none,
Unles that of your approbation,
Which if your thoughts at going out will pay,
Hee'l not looke farther for a second day.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Vnhappy youth, betrayd by Fate
To such a love hath sainted hate,
And damned those celestiall bands
Are onely knit with equal hands;
The love of great ones is a love,
Gods are incapable to prove:
For where there is a joy uneven,
There never, never can be Heav'n:

RHYME a a *

'Tis such a love as is not sent
To fiends as yet for punishment;
IXION willingly doth feele
The gyre of his eternal wheele,
Nor would he now exchange his paine
For cloudes and goddesses againe.

RHYME a a *

  Wouldst thou with tempests lye?  Then bow
To th' rougher furrows of her brow,
Or make a thunder-bolt thy choyce?
Then catch at her more fatal voyce;
Or 'gender with the lightning? trye
The subtler flashes of her eye:
Poore SEMELE wel knew the same,
Who both imbrac't her God and flame;
And not alone in soule did burne,
But in this love did ashes turne.

RHYME a a *

  How il doth majesty injoy
The bow and gaity oth' boy,
As if the purple-roabe should sit,
And sentence give ith' chayr of wit.

RHYME a a *

  Say, ever-dying wretch, to whom
Each answer is a certaine doom,
What is it that you would possesse,
The Countes, or the naked Besse?
Would you her gowne or title do?
Her box or gem, the thing or show?
If you meane HER, the very HER,
Abstracted from her caracter,
Unhappy boy! you may as soone
With fawning wanton with the Moone,
Or with an amorous complaint
Get prostitute your very saint;

RHYME a a *

Not that we are not mortal, or
Fly VENUS altars, and abhor
The selfesame knack, for which you pine;
But we (defend us!) are divine,
[Not] female, but madam born, and come
From a right-honourable wombe.
Shal we then mingle with the base,
And bring a silver-tinsell race?
Whilst th' issue noble wil not passe
The gold alloyd (almost halfe brasse),
And th' blood in each veine doth appeare,
Part thick Booreinn, part Lady Cleare;

RHYME a a *

Like to the sordid insects sprung
From Father Sun and Mother Dung:
Yet lose we not the hold we have,
But faster graspe the trembling slave;

RHYME a a *

Play at baloon with's heart, and winde
The strings like scaines, steale into his minde
Ten thousand false and feigned joyes
Far worse then they; whilst, like whipt boys,

  This heard, Sir, play stil in her eyes,
And be a dying, live like flyes
Caught by their angle-legs, and whom
The torch laughs peece-meale to consume.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

When love with unconfined wings
  Hovers within my gates;
And my divine ALTHEA brings
  To whisper at the grates;
When I lye tangled in her haire,
  And fetterd to her eye,
The birds, that wanton in the aire,
  Know no such liberty.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

When flowing cups run swiftly round
  With no allaying THAMES,
Our carelesse heads with roses bound,
  Our hearts with loyal flames;
When thirsty griefe in wine we steepe,
  When healths and draughts go free,
Fishes, that tipple in the deepe,
  Know no such libertie.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

When (like committed linnets) I
  With shriller throat shall sing
The sweetnes, mercy, majesty,
  And glories of my King.
When I shall voyce aloud, how good
  He is, how great should be,
Inlarged winds, that curle the flood,
  Know no such liberty.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

Stone walls doe not a prison make,
  Nor iron bars a cage;
Mindes innocent and quiet take
  That for an hermitage;
If I have freedome in my love,
  And in my soule am free,
Angels alone that sore above
  Enjoy such liberty.

TITLE

RHYME a a a b b b 

  Now the peace is made at the foes rate,
Whilst men of armes to kettles their old helmes translate,
  And drinke in caskes of honourable plate.
    In ev'ry hand [let] a cup be found,
    That from all hearts a health may sound
    To GORING! to GORING! see 't goe round.

RHYME a a a b b b 

  He whose glories shine so brave and high,
That captive they in triumph leade each care and eye,
  Claiming uncombated the victorie,
    And from the earth to heav'n rebound,
    Fixt there eternall as this round:
    To GORING! to GORING! see him crown'd.

RHYME a a a b b b 

  To his lovely bride, in love with scars,
Whose eyes wound deepe in peace, as doth his sword in wars;
  They shortly must depose the Queen of Stars:
    Her cheekes the morning blushes give,
    And the benighted world repreeve;
    To LETTICE! to LETTICE! let her live.

RHYME a a a b b b 

  Give me scorching heat, thy heat, dry Sun,
That to this payre I may drinke off an ocean:
  Yet leave my grateful thirst unquensht, undone;
    Or a full bowle of heav'nly wine,
    In which dissolved stars should shine,
    To the couple! to the couple! th' are divine.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Heark, faire one, how what e're here is
  Doth laugh and sing at thy distresse;
Not out of hate to thy reliefe,
  But joy t' enjoy thee, though in griefe.

RHYME a a *

See! that which chaynes you, you chaine here;
  The prison is thy prisoner;
How much thy jaylor's keeper art!
  He bindes your hands, but you his heart.

RHYME a a *

The gyves to rase so smooth a skin,
  Are so unto themselves within;
But, blest to kisse so fayre an arme,
  Haste to be happy with that harme;

RHYME a a *

And play about thy wanton wrist,
  As if in them thou so wert drest;
But if too rough, too hard they presse,
  Oh, they but closely, closely kisse.

RHYME a a *

And as thy bare feet blesse the way,
  The people doe not mock, but pray,
And call thee, as amas'd they run
  Instead of prostitute, a nun.

RHYME a a *

The merry torch burnes with desire
  To kindle the eternall fire,
And lightly daunces in thine eyes
  To tunes of epithalamies.

RHYME a a *

The sheet's ty'd ever to thy wast,
  How thankfull to be so imbrac't!
And see! thy very very bonds
  Are bound to thee, to binde such hands.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

If teares could wash the ill away,
A pearle for each wet bead I'd pay;
But as dew'd corne the fuller growes,
So water'd eyes but swell our woes.

RHYME a a *

One drop another cals, which still
(Griefe adding fuell) doth distill;
Too fruitfull of her selfe is anguish,
We need no cherishing to languish.

RHYME a a *

Coward fate degen'rate man
Like little children uses, when
He whips us first, untill we weepe,
Then, 'cause we still a weeping keepe.

RHYME a a *

Then from thy firme selfe never swerve;
Teares fat the griefe that they should sterve;
Iron decrees of destinie
Are ner'e wipe't out with a wet eye.

RHYME a a *

But this way you may gaine the field,
Oppose but sorrow, and 'twill yield;
One gallant thorough-made resolve
Doth starry influence dissolve.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  This is the prittiest motion:
Madam, th' alarums of a drumme
That cals your lord, set to your cries,
To mine are sacred symphonies.

RHYME a a *

  What, though 'tis said I have a voice;
I know 'tis but that hollow noise
Which (as it through my pipe doth speed)
Bitterns do carol through a reed;
In the same key with monkeys jiggs,
Or dirges of proscribed piggs,
Or the soft Serenades above
In calme of night, when cats make love.

RHYME a a *

  Was ever such a consort seen!
Fourscore and fourteen with forteen?
Yet sooner they'l agree, one paire,
Then we in our spring-winter aire;
They may imbrace, sigh, kiss, the rest:
Our breath knows nought but east and west.
Thus have I heard to childrens cries
The faire nurse still such lullabies,
That, well all sayd (for what there lay),
The pleasure did the sorrow pay.

RHYME a a *

  Sure ther's another way to save
Your phansie,madam; that's to have
('Tis but a petitioning kinde fate)
The organs sent to Bilingsgate,
Where they to that soft murm'ring quire
Shall teach you all you can admire!
Or do but heare, how love-bang Kate
In pantry darke for freage of mate,
With edge of steele the square wood shapes,
And DIDO to it chaunts or scrapes.
The merry Phaeton oth' carre
You'l vow makes a melodious jarre;

RHYME a a *

Sweeter and sweeter whisleth He
To un-anointed axel-tree;
Such swift notes he and 's wheels do run;
For me, I yeeld him Phaebus son.
  Say, faire Comandres, can it be
You should ordaine a mutinie?
For where I howle, all accents fall,
As kings harangues, to one and all.

RHYME a a *

  Ulisses art is now withstood:
You ravish both with sweet and good;
Saint Syren, sing, for I dare heare,
But when I ope', oh, stop your eare.

RHYME a a *

  Far lesse be't aemulation
To passe me, or in trill or tone,
Like the thin throat of Philomel,
And the smart lute who should excell,
As if her soft cords should begin,
And strive for sweetnes with the pin.

RHYME a a *

  Yet can I musick too; but such
As is beyond all voice or touch;
My minde can in faire order chime,
Whilst my true heart still beats the time;
My soule['s] so full of harmonie,
That it with all parts can agree;

RHYME a a *

If you winde up to the highest fret,
It shall descend an eight from it,
And when you shall vouchsafe to fall,
Sixteene above you it shall call,
And yet, so dis-assenting one,
They both shall meet in unison.

RHYME a a *

  Come then, bright cherubin, begin!
My loudest musick is within.
Take all notes with your skillfull eyes;
Hearke, if mine do not sympathise!
Sound all my thoughts, and see exprest
The tablature of my large brest;
Then you'l admit, that I too can
Musick above dead sounds of man;
Such as alone doth blesse the spheres,
Not to be reacht with humane eares.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

    "Come, pretty birds, present your lays,
     And learn to chaunt a goddess praise;
     Ye wood-nymphs, let your voices be
     Employ'd to serve her deity:
     And warble forth, ye virgins nine,
     Some music to my Valentine.

RHYME a a *

    "Her bosom is love's paradise,
     There is no heav'n but in her eyes;
     She's chaster than the turtle-dove,
     And fairer than the queen of love:
     Yet all perfections do combine
     To beautifie my Valentine.

RHYME a a *

    "She's Nature's choicest cabinet,
     Where honour, beauty, worth and wit
     Are all united in her breast.
     The graces claim an interest:
     All virtues that are most divine
     Shine clearest in my Valentine."

TITLE

RHYME a a a 

Tell me, ye subtill judges in loves treasury,
Inform me, which hath most inricht mine eye,
This diamonds greatnes, or its clarity?

RHYME a a a 

Ye cloudy spark lights, whose vast multitude
Of fires are harder to be found then view'd,
Waite on this star in her first magnitude.

RHYME a a a 

Calmely or roughly!  Ah, she shines too much;
That now I lye (her influence is such),
Chrusht with too strong a hand, or soft a touch.

RHYME a a a 

Lovers, beware! a certaine, double harme
Waits your proud hopes, her looks al-killing charm
Guarded by her as true victorious arme.

RHYME a a a 

Thus with her eyes brave Tamyris spake dread,
Which when the kings dull breast not entered,
Finding she could not looke, she strook him dead.

RHYME a a a 

I cannot tell, who loves the skeleton
Of a poor marmoset; nought but boan, boan;
Give me a nakednesse, with her cloath's on.

RHYME a a a 

Such, whose white-sattin upper coat of skin,
Cut upon velvet rich incarnadin,
Has yet a body (and of flesh) within.

RHYME a a a 

Sure, it is meant good husbandry in men,
Who do incorporate with aery leane,
T' repair their sides, and get their ribb agen.

RHYME a a a 

Hard hap unto that huntsman, that decrees
Fat joys for all his swet, when as he sees,
After his 'say, nought but his keepers fees.

RHYME a a a 

Then, Love, I beg, when next thou tak'st thy bow,
Thy angry shafts, and dost heart-chasing go,
Passe RASCALL DEARE, strike me the largest doe.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

Comanding asker, if it be
  Pity that you faine would have,
Then I turne begger unto thee,
  And aske the thing that thou dost crave.
I will suffice thy hungry need,
So thou wilt but my fancy feed.

RHYME a b a b c c 

In all ill yeares, was ever knowne
  On so much beauty such a dearth?
Which, in that thrice-bequeathed gowne,
  Lookes like the Sun eclipst with Earth,
Like gold in canvas, or with dirt
Unsoyled Ermins close begirt.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Yet happy he, that can but tast
  This whiter skin, who thirsty is!
Fooles dote on sattin motions lac'd:
  The gods go naked in their blisse.
At th' barrell's head there shines the vine,
There only relishes the wine.

RHYME a b a b c c 

There quench my heat, and thou shalt sup
  Worthy the lips that it must touch,
Nectar from out the starry cup:
  I beg thy breath not halfe so much.
So both our wants supplied shall be,
You'l give for love, I, charity.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Cheape then are pearle-imbroderies,
  That not adorne, but cloud thy wast;
Thou shalt be cloath'd above all prise,
  If thou wilt promise me imbrac't.
Wee'l ransack neither chest nor shelfe:
Ill cover thee with mine owne selfe.

RHYME a b a b c c 

But, cruel, if thou dost deny
  This necessary almes to me,
What soft-soul'd man but with his eye
  And hand will hence be shut to thee?
Since all must judge you more unkinde:
I starve your body, you, my minde.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  You, that can haply mixe your joyes with cries,
And weave white Ios with black Elegies,
Can caroll out a dirge, and in one breath
Sing to the tune either of life, or death;
You, that can weepe the gladnesse of the spheres,
And pen a hymne, in stead of inke, with teares;
Here, here your unproportion'd wit let fall,
To celebrate this new-borne funerall,
And greete that little greatnesse, which from th' wombe
Dropt both a load to th' cradle and the tombe.

RHYME a a *

  Bright soule! teach us, to warble with what feet
Thy swathing linnen and thy winding sheet,
Weepe, or shout forth that fonts solemnitie,
Which at once christn'd and buried thee,
And change our shriller passions with that sound,
First told thee into th' ayre, then to the ground.

RHYME a a *

  Ah, wert thou borne for this? only to call
The King and Queen guests to your buriall!
To bid good night, your day not yet begun,
And shew a setting, ere a rising sun!

RHYME a a *

  Or wouldst thou have thy life a martyrdom?
Dye in the act of thy religion,
Fit, excellently, innocently good,
First sealing it with water, then thy blood?

RHYME a a *

As when on blazing wings a blest man sores,
And having past to God through fiery dores,
Straight 's roab'd with flames, when the same element,
Which was his shame, proves now his ornament;
Oh, how he hast'ned death, burn't to be fryed,
Kill'd twice with each delay, till deified.

RHYME a a *

So swift hath been thy race, so full of flight,
Like him condemn'd, ev'n aged with a night,
Cutting all lets with clouds, as if th' hadst been
Like angels plum'd, and borne a Cherubin.

RHYME a a *

  Or, in your journey towards heav'n, say,
Tooke you the world a little in your way?
Saw'st and dislik'st its vaine pompe, then didst flye
Up for eternall glories to the skye?
Like a religious ambitious one,
Aspiredst for the everlasting crowne?

RHYME a a *

  Ah! holy traytour to your brother prince,
Rob'd of his birth-right and preheminence!
Could you ascend yon' chaire of state e're him,
And snatch from th' heire the starry diadem?
Making your honours now as much uneven,
As gods on earth are lesse then saints in heav'n.

RHYME a a *

  Triumph! sing triumphs, then!  Oh, put on all
Your richest lookes, drest for this festivall!
Thoughts full of ravisht reverence, with eyes
So fixt, as when a saint we canonize;
Clap wings with Seraphins before the throne
At this eternall coronation,
And teach your soules new mirth, such as may be
Worthy this birth-day to divinity.

RHYME a a *

  But ah! these blast your feasts, the jubilies
We send you up are sad, as were our cries,
And of true joy we can expresse no more
Thus crown'd, then when we buried thee before.

RHYME a a *

  Princesse in heav'n, forgivenes! whilst we
Resigne our office to the HIERARCHY.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Pray, ladies, breath, awhile lay by
Caelestial Sydney's ARCADY;
Heere's a story that doth claime
A little respite from his flame:
Then with a quick dissolving looke
Unfold the smoothnes of this book,
To which no art (except your sight)
Can reach a worthy epithite;
'Tis an abstract of all volumes,
A pillaster of all columnes
Fancy e're rear'd to wit, to be
The smallest gods epitome,
And so compactedly expresse
All lovers pleasing wretchednes.

RHYME a a *

  Gallant Pamela's majesty
And her sweet sisters modesty
Are fixt in each of you; you are,
Distinct, what these together were;
Divinest, that are really
What Cariclea's feign'd to be;

RHYME a a *

That are ev'ry one the Nine,
And brighter here Astreas shine;
View our Lucippe, and remaine
In her, these beauties o're againe.

RHYME a a *

  Amazement!  Noble Clitophon
Ev'n now lookt somewhat colder on
His cooler mistresse, and she too
Smil'd not as she us'd to do.
See! the individuall payre
Are at sad oddes, and parted are;
They quarrell, aemulate, and stand
At strife, who first shal kisse your hand.

RHYME a a *

  A new dispute there lately rose
Betwixt the Greekes and Latines, whose
Temples should be bound with glory,
In best languaging this story;

RHYME a a *

Yee heyres of love, that with one SMILE
A ten-yeeres war can reconcile;
Peacefull Hellens!  Vertuous!  See:
The jarring languages agree!
And here, all armes layd by, they doe
In English meet to wayt on you.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

       "Fair ones, breathe: a while lay by
     Blessed Sidney's ARCADY:
     Here's a story that will make
     You not repent HIM to forsake;
     And with your dissolving looke
     Vntie the contents of this booke;
     To which nought (except your sight)
     Can give a worthie epithite.
     'Tis an abstract of all volumes,
     A pillaster of all columnes
     Fancie e're rear'd to wit, to be
     Little LOVE'S epitome,
     And compactedly expresse
     All lovers happy wretchednesse.

RHYME a a *

       "Brave PAMELA'S majestie
     And her sweet sister's modestie
     Are fixt in each of you, you are
     Alone, what these together were
     Divinest, that are really
     What Cariclea's feign'd to be;
     That are every one, the Nine;
     And on earth Astraeas shine;
     Be our LEUCIPPE, and remaine
     In HER, all these o're againe.

RHYME a a *

       "Wonder!  Noble CLITOPHON
     Me thinkes lookes somewhat colder on
     His beauteous mistresse, and she too
     Smiles not as she us'd to doe.
     See! the individuall payre
     Are at oddes and parted are;
     Quarrel, emulate, and stand
     At strife, who first shall kisse your hand.

RHYME a a *

       "A new warre e're while arose
     'Twixt the GREEKES and LATINES, whose
     Temples should be bound with glory
     In best languaging this story:
     You, that with one lovely smile
     A ten-yeares warre can reconcile;
     Peacefull Hellens awfull see
     The jarring languages agree,
     And here all armes laid by, they doe
     Meet in English to court you."

RHYME a a *

     "The happy OBJECT of her eye
     Was SIDNEY'S living ARCADY:
     Whose amorous tale had so betrai'd
     Desire in this all-lovely maid;
     That, whilst her check a blush did warm,
     I read LOVES story in her form."

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Hearke, reader! wilt be learn'd ith' warres?
  A gen'rall in a gowne?
Strike a league with arts and scarres,
  And snatch from each a crowne?

RHYME a b a b 

Wouldst be a wonder?  Such a one,
  As should win with a looke?
A bishop in a garison,
  And conquer by the booke?

RHYME a b a b 

Take then this mathematick shield,
  And henceforth by its rules
Be able to dispute ith' field,
  And combate in the schooles.

RHYME a b a b 

Whilst peaceful learning once againe
  And the souldier so concord,
As that he fights now with her penne,
  And she writes with his sword.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

     Harke, reader, would'st be learn'd ith' warres,
       A CAPTAINE in a gowne?
     Strike a league with bookes and starres,
       And weave of both the crowne?

RHYME a b a b 

     Would'st be a wonder?  Such a one
       As would winne with a looke?
     A schollar in a garrison?
       And conquer by the booke?

RHYME a b a b 

     Take then this mathematick shield,
       And henceforth by its rules,
     Be able to dispute ith' field,
       And combate in the schooles.

RHYME a b a b 

     Whil'st peacefull learning once agen
       And th' souldier do concorde,
     As that he fights now with her penne,
       And she writes with his sword.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  How have I bin religious? what strange good
Has scap't me, that I never understood?
Have I hel-guarded Haeresie o'rthrowne?
Heald wounded states? made kings and kingdoms one?
That FATE should be so merciful to me,
To let me live t' have said I have read thee.

RHYME a a *

  Faire star, ascend! the joy! the life! the light
Of this tempestuous age, this darke worlds sight!
Oh, from thy crowne of glory dart one flame
May strike a sacred reverence, whilest thy name
(Like holy flamens to their god of day)
We bowing, sing; and whilst we praise, we pray.

RHYME a a *

  Bright spirit! whose aeternal motion
Of wit, like Time, stil in it selfe did run,
Binding all others in it, and did give
Commission, how far this or that shal live;
Like DESTINY of poems who, as she
Signes death to all, her selfe cam never dye.

RHYME a a *

  And now thy purple-robed Traegedy,
In her imbroider'd buskins, cals mine eye,
Where the brave Aetius we see betray'd,
T' obey his death, whom thousand lives obey'd;
Whilst that the mighty foole his scepter breakes,
And through his gen'rals wounds his own doome speakes,
Weaving thus richly VALENTINIAN,
The costliest monarch with the cheapest man.

RHYME a a *

  Souldiers may here to their old glories adde,
The LOVER love, and be with reason MAD:
Not, as of old, Alcides furious,
Who wilder then his bull did teare the house
(Hurling his language with the canvas stone):
Twas thought the monster ror'd the sob'rer tone.

RHYME a a *

  But ah! when thou thy sorrow didst inspire
With passions, blacke as is her darke attire,
Virgins as sufferers have wept to see
So white a soule, so red a crueltie;
That thou hast griev'd, and with unthought redresse
Dri'd their wet eyes who now thy mercy blesse;
Yet, loth to lose thy watry jewell, when
Joy wip't it off, laughter straight sprung't agen.

RHYME a a *

  Now ruddy checked Mirth with rosie wings
Fans ev'ry brow with gladnesse, whilst she sings
Delight to all, and the whole theatre
A festivall in heaven doth appeare:
Nothing but pleasure, love; and (like the morne)
Each face a gen'ral smiling doth adorne.

RHYME a a *

  Heare ye, foul speakers, that pronounce the aire
Of stewes and shores, I will informe you where
And how to cloath aright your wanton wit,
Without her nasty bawd attending it:
View here a loose thought sayd with such a grace,
Minerva might have spoke in Venus face;
So well disguis'd, that 'twas conceiv'd by none
But Cupid had Diana's linnen on;
And all his naked parts so vail'd, th' expresse
The shape with clowding the uncomlinesse;
That if this Reformation, which we
Receiv'd, had not been buried with thee,

RHYME a a *

The stage (as this worke) might have liv'd and lov'd
Her lines, the austere Skarlet had approv'd;
And th' actors wisely been from that offence
As cleare, as they are now from audience.

RHYME a a *

  Thus with thy Genius did the scaene expire,
Wanting thy active and correcting fire,
That now (to spread a darknesse over all)
Nothing remaines but Poesie to fall:
And though from these thy Embers we receive
Some warmth, so much as may be said, we live;

RHYME a a *

That we dare praise thee blushlesse, in the head
Of the best piece Hermes to Love e're read;
That we rejoyce and glory in thy wit,
And feast each other with remembring it;
That we dare speak thy thought, thy acts recite:
Yet all men henceforth be afraid to write.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

LUCASTA (fair, but hapless maid!)
Once flourisht underneath the shade
Of your illustrious Mother; now,
An orphan grown, she bows to you!
To you, her vertues' noble heir;
Oh may she find protection there!

RHYME a a *

Nor let her welcome be the less,
'Cause a rough hand makes her address:
One (to whom foes the Muses are)
Born and bred up in rugged war:
For, conscious how unfit I am,
I only have pronounc'd her name
To waken pity in your brest,
And leave her tears to plead the rest.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

LUCASTA, frown, and let me die,
  But smile, and see, I live;
The sad indifference of your eye
  Both kills and doth reprieve.
You hide our fate within its screen;
  We feel our judgment, ere we hear.
So in one picture I have seen
  An angel here, the devil there.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Introth, I do my self perswade,
  That the wilde boy is grown a man,
And all his childishnesse off laid,
  E're since LUCASTA did his fires fan;
    H' has left his apish jigs,
    And whipping hearts like gigs:
  For t' other day I heard him swear,
That beauty should be crown'd in honours chair.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

With what a true and heavenly state
  He doth his glorious darts dispence,
Now cleans'd from falsehood, blood and hate,
  And newly tipt with innocence!
    Love Justice is become,
    And doth the cruel doome;
  Reversed is the old decree;
Behold! he sits inthron'd with majestie.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Inthroned in LUCASTA'S eye,
  He doth our faith and hearts survey;
Then measures them by sympathy,
  And each to th' others breast convey;
    Whilst to his altars now
    The frozen vestals bow,
  And strickt Diana too doth go
A-hunting with his fear'd, exchanged bow.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Th' imbracing seas and ambient air
  Now in his holy fires burn;
Fish couple, birds and beasts in pair
  Do their own sacrifices turn.
    This is a miracle,
    That might religion swell;
  But she, that these and their god awes,
Her crowned self submits to her own laws.

RHYME a a b b b 

Twas not for some calm blessing to deceive,
Thou didst thy polish'd hands in shagg'd furs weave;
  It were no blessing thus obtain'd;
  Thou rather would'st a curse have gain'd,
Then let thy warm driven snow be ever stain'd.

RHYME a a b b b 

Not that you feared the discolo'ring cold
Might alchymize their silver into gold;
  Nor could your ten white nuns so sin,
  That you should thus pennance them in,
Each in her coarse hair smock of discipline.

RHYME a a b b b 

Nor, Hero-like who, on their crest still wore
A lyon, panther, leopard, or a bore,
  To looke their enemies in their herse,
  Thou would'st thy hand should deeper pierce,
And, in its softness rough, appear more fierce.

RHYME a a b b b 

No, no, LUCASTA, destiny decreed,
That beasts to thee a sacrifice should bleed,
  And strip themselves to make you gay:
  For ne'r yet herald did display
A coat, where SABLES upon ERMIN lay.

RHYME a a b b b 

This for lay-lovers, that must stand at dore,
Salute the threshold, and admire no more;
  But I, in my invention tough,
  Rate not this outward bliss enough,
But still contemplate must the hidden muffe.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

     LADIES turn conjurers, and can impart
     The hidden mystery of the black art,
     Black artificial patches do betray;
     They more affect the works of night than day.
     The creature strives the Creator to disgrace,
     By patching that which is a perfect face:

RHYME a a *

     A little stain upon the purest dye
     Is both offensive to the heart and eye.
     Defile not then with spots that face of snow,
     Where the wise God His workmanship doth show,
     The light of nature and the light of grace
     Is the complexion for a lady's face.

TITLE

RHYME a a a 

As I beheld a winter's evening air,
Curl'd in her court-false-locks of living hair,
Butter'd with jessamine the sun left there.

RHYME a a a 

Galliard and clinquant she appear'd to give,
A serenade or ball to us that grieve,
And teach us A LA MODE more gently live.

RHYME a a a 

But as a Moor, who to her cheeks prefers
White spots, t' allure her black idolaters,
Me thought she look'd all ore-bepatch'd with stars.

RHYME a a a 

Like the dark front of some Ethiopian queen,
Vailed all ore with gems of red, blew, green,
Whose ugly night seem'd masked with days skreen.

RHYME a a a 

Whilst the fond people offer'd sacrifice
To saphyrs, 'stead of veins and arteries,
And bow'd unto the diamonds, not her eyes.

RHYME a a a 

Behold LUCASTA'S face, how't glows like noon!
A sun intire is her complexion,
And form'd of one whole constellation.

RHYME a a a 

So gently shining, so serene, so cleer,
Her look doth universal Nature cheer;
Only a cloud or two hangs here and there.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  I laugh and sing, but cannot tell
  Whether the folly on't sounds well;
               But then I groan,
               Methinks, in tune;
Whilst grief, despair and fear dance to the air
          Of my despised prayer.

RHYME a a *

  A pretty antick love does this,
  Then strikes a galliard with a kiss;
               As in the end
               The chords they rend;
So you but with a touch from your fair hand
          Turn all to saraband.

TITLE

RHYME a a b b b 

Like to the sent'nel stars, I watch all night;
     For still the grand round of your light
               And glorious breast
          Awake in me an east:
Nor will my rolling eyes ere know a west.

RHYME a a b b b 

Now on my down I'm toss'd as on a wave,
     And my repose is made my grave;
               Fluttering I lye,
          Do beat my self and dye,
But for a resurrection from your eye.

RHYME a a b b b 

Ah, my fair murdresse! dost thou cruelly heal
     With various pains to make me well?
               Then let me be
          Thy cut anatomie,
And in each mangled part my heart you'l see.

TITLE

RHYME a a b b 

I' th' autumn of a summer's day,
When all the winds got leave to play,
LUCASTA, that fair ship, is lanch'd,
And from its crust this almond blanch'd.

RHYME a a b b 

Blow then, unruly northwind, blow,
'Till in their holds your eyes you stow;
And swell your cheeks, bequeath chill death;
See! she hath smil'd thee out of breath.

RHYME a a b b 

Court, gentle zephyr, court and fan
Her softer breast's carnation wan;
Your charming rhethorick of down
Flyes scatter'd from before her frown.

RHYME a a b b 

Say, my white water-lilly, say,
How is't those warm streams break away,
Cut by thy chast cold breast, which dwells
Amidst them arm'd in isicles?

RHYME a a b b 

And the hot floods, more raging grown,
In flames of thee then in their own,
In their distempers wildly glow,
And kisse thy pillar of fix'd snow.

RHYME a a b b 

No sulphur, through whose each blew vein
The thick and lazy currents strein,
Can cure the smarting nor the fell
Blisters of love, wherewith they swell.

RHYME a a b b 

These great physicians of the blind,
The lame, and fatal blains of Inde
In every drop themselves now see
Speckled with a new leprosie.

RHYME a a b b 

As sick drinks are with old wine dash'd,
Foul waters too with spirits wash'd,
Thou greiv'd, perchance, one tear let'st fall,
Which straight did purifie them all.

RHYME a a b b 

And now is cleans'd enough the flood,
Which since runs cleare as doth thy blood;
Of the wet pearls uncrown thy hair,
And mantle thee with ermin air.

RHYME a a b b 

Lucasta, hail! fair conqueresse
Of fire, air, earth and seas!
Thou whom all kneel to, yet even thou
Wilt unto love, thy captive, bow.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

Forbear, thou great good husband, little ant;
  A little respite from thy flood of sweat!
Thou, thine own horse and cart under this plant,
  Thy spacious tent, fan thy prodigious heat;
Down with thy double load of that one grain!
It is a granarie for all thy train.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Cease, large example of wise thrift, awhile
  (For thy example is become our law),
And teach thy frowns a seasonable smile:
  So Cato sometimes the nak'd Florals saw.
And thou, almighty foe, lay by thy sting,
Whilst thy unpay'd musicians, crickets, sing.

RHYME a b a b c c 

LUCASTA, she that holy makes the day,
  And 'stills new life in fields of fueillemort,
Hath back restor'd their verdure with one ray,
  And with her eye bid all to play and sport,
Ant, to work still! age will thee truant call;
And to save now, th'art worse than prodigal.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Austere and cynick! not one hour t' allow,
  To lose with pleasure, what thou gotst with pain;
But drive on sacred festivals thy plow,
  Tearing high-ways with thy ore-charged wain.
Not all thy life-time one poor minute live,
And thy ore-labour'd bulk with mirth relieve?

RHYME a b a b c c 

Look up then, miserable ant, and spie
  Thy fatal foes, for breaking of their law,
Hov'ring above thee: Madam MARGARET PIE:
  And her fierce servant, meagre Sir JOHN DAW:
Thy self and storehouse now they do store up,
And thy whole harvest too within their crop.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Thus we unt[h]rifty thrive within earth's tomb
  For some more rav'nous and ambitious jaw:
The grain in th' ant's, the ant in the pie's womb,
  The pie in th' hawk's, the hawk ith' eagle's maw.
So scattering to hord 'gainst a long day,
Thinking to save all, we cast all away.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Strive not, vain lover, to be fine;
  Thy silk's the silk-worm's, and not thine:
You lessen to a fly your mistriss' thought,
To think it may be in a cobweb caught.
  What, though her thin transparent lawn
  Thy heart in a strong net hath drawn:
Not all the arms the god of fire ere made
Can the soft bulwarks of nak'd love invade.

RHYME a a *

  Be truly fine, then, and yourself dress
  In her fair soul's immac'late glass.
Then by reflection you may have the bliss
Perhaps to see what a true fineness is;
  When all your gawderies will fit
  Those only that are poor in wit.
She that a clinquant outside doth adore,
Dotes on a gilded statue and no more.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Nay, prethee, dear, draw nigher,
  Yet closer, nigher yet;
Here is a double fire,
  A dry one and a wet.
True lasting heavenly fuel
Puts out the vestal jewel,
When once we twining marry
Mad love with wild canary.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Off with that crowned Venice,
  'Till all the house doth flame,
Wee'l quench it straight in Rhenish,
  Or what we must not name.
Milk lightning still asswageth;
So when our fury rageth,
As th' only means to cross it,
Wee'l drown it in love's posset.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Love never was well-willer
  Unto my nag or mee,
Ne'r watter'd us ith' cellar,
  But the cheap buttery.
At th' head of his own barrells,
Where broach'd are all his quarrels,
Should a true noble master
Still make his guest his taster.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

See, all the world how't staggers,
  More ugly drunk then we,
As if far gone in daggers
  And blood it seem'd to be.
We drink our glass of roses,
Which nought but sweets discloses:
Then in our loyal chamber
Refresh us with love's amber.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Now tell me, thou fair cripple,
  That dumb canst scarcely see
Th' almightinesse of tipple,
  And th' ods 'twixt thee and thee,
What of Elizium's missing,
Still drinking and still kissing;
Adoring plump October;
Lord! what is man, and sober?

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

Now, is there such a trifle
  As honour, the fools gyant,
What is there left to rifle,
  When wine makes all parts plyant?
Let others glory follow,
In their false riches wallow,
And with their grief be merry:
Leave me but love and sherry.

TITLE

RHYME a a b c c b 

In the nativity of time,
Chloris! it was not thought a crime
  In direct Hebrew for to woe.
Now wee make love, as all on fire,
Ring retrograde our lowd desire,
  And court in English backward too.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Thrice happy was that golden age,
When complement was constru'd rage,
  And fine words in the center hid;
When cursed NO stain'd no maid's blisse,
And all discourse was summ'd in YES,
  And nought forbad, but to forbid.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Love then unstinted love did sip,
And cherries pluck'd fresh from the lip,
  On cheeks and roses free he fed;
Lasses, like Autumne plums, did drop,
And lads indifferently did drop
  A flower and a maiden-head.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Then unconfined each did tipple
Wine from the bunch, milk from the nipple;
  Paps tractable as udders were.
Then equally the wholsome jellies
Were squeez'd from olive-trees and bellies:
  Nor suits of trespasse did they fear.

RHYME a a b c c b 

A fragrant bank of strawberries,
Diaper'd with violets' eyes,
  Was table, table-cloth and fare;
No palace to the clouds did swell,
Each humble princesse then did dwell
  In the Piazza of her hair.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Both broken faith and th' cause of it,
All-damning gold, was damn'd to th' pit;
  Their troth seal'd with a clasp and kisse,
Lasted until that extreem day,
In which they smil'd their souls away,
  And in each other breath'd new blisse.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Because no fault, there was no tear;
No grone did grate the granting ear,
  No false foul breath, their del'cat smell.
No serpent kiss poyson'd the tast,
Each touch was naturally chast,
  And their mere Sense a Miracle.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Naked as their own innocence,
And unembroyder'd from offence,
  They went, above poor riches, gay;
On softer than the cignet's down,
In beds they tumbled off their own:
  For each within the other lay.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Thus did they live: thus did they love,
Repeating only joyes above,
  And angels were but with cloaths on,
Which they would put off cheerfully,
To bathe them in the Galaxie,
  Then gird them with the heavenly zone.

RHYME a a b c c b 

Now, Chloris! miserably crave
The offer'd blisse you would not have,
  Which evermore I must deny:
Whilst ravish'd with these noble dreams,
And crowned with mine own soft beams,
  Injoying of my self I lye.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  And why an honour'd ragged shirt, that shows,
Like tatter'd ensigns, all its bodie's blows?
Should it be swathed in a vest so dire,
It were enough to set the child on fire;
Dishevell'd queen[s] should strip them of their hair,
And in it mantle the new rising heir:
Nor do I know ought worth to wrap it in,
Except my parchment upper-coat of skin;
And then expect no end of its chast tears,
That first was rowl'd in down, now furs of bears.

RHYME a a *

  But since to ladies 't hath a custome been
Linnen to send, that travail and lye in;
To the nine sempstresses, my former friends,
I su'd; but they had nought but shreds and ends.
At last, the jolli'st of the three times three
Rent th' apron from her smock, and gave it me;
'Twas soft and gentle, subt'ly spun, no doubt;
Pardon my boldnese, madam; HERE'S THE CLOUT.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

I did believe I was in heav'n,
When first the heav'n her self was giv'n,
That in my heart her beams did passe
As some the sun keep in a glasse,
So that her beauties thorow me
Did hurt my rival-enemy.
But fate, alas! decreed it so,
That I was engine to my woe:
For, as a corner'd christal spot,
My heart diaphanous was not;
But solid stuffe, where her eye flings
Quick fire upon the catching strings:
Yet, as at triumphs in the night,
You see the Prince's Arms in light,
So, when I once was set on flame,
I burnt all ore the letters of her name.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

You are deceiv'd; I sooner may, dull fair,
Seat a dark Moor in Cassiopea's chair,
    Or on the glow-worm's uselesse light
    Bestow the watching flames of night,
        Or give the rose's breath
        To executed death,
            Ere the bright hiew
            Of verse to you;
It is just Heaven on beauty stamps a fame,
And we, alas! its triumphs but proclaim.

RHYME a a *

What chains but are too light for me, should I
Say that Lucasta in strange arms could lie?
    Or that Castara were impure;
    Or Saccarisa's faith unsure?
        That Chloris' love, as hair,
        Embrac'd each en'mies air;
            That all their good
            Ran in their blood?
'Tis the same wrong th' unworthy to inthrone,
As from her proper sphere t' have vertue thrown.

RHYME a a *

That strange force on the ignoble hath renown;
As AURUM FULMINANS, it blows vice down.
    'Twere better (heavy one) to crawl
    Forgot, then raised, trod on [to] fall.
        All your defections now
        Are not writ on your brow;
            Odes to faults give
            A shame must live.
When a fat mist we view, we coughing run;
But, that once meteor drawn, all cry: undone.

RHYME a a *

How bright the fair Paulina did appear,
When hid in jewels she did seem a star!
    But who could soberly behold
    A wicked owl in cloath of gold,
        Or the ridiculous Ape
        In sacred Vesta's shape?
            So doth agree
            Just praise with thee:
For since thy birth gave thee no beauty, know,
No poets pencil must or can do so.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

Love drunk, the other day, knockt at my brest,
    But I, alas! was not within.
My man, my ear, told me he came t' attest,
    That without cause h'd boxed him,
And battered the windows of mine eyes,
And took my heart for one of's nunneries.

RHYME a b a b c c 

I wondred at the outrage safe return'd,
    And stormed at the base affront;
And by a friend of mine, bold faith, that burn'd,
    I called him to a strict accompt.
He said that, by the law, the challeng'd might
Take the advantage both of arms and fight.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Two darts of equal length and points he sent,
    And nobly gave the choyce to me,
Which I not weigh'd, young and indifferent,
    Now full of nought but victorie.
So we both met in one of's mother's groves,
The time, at the first murm'ring of her doves.

RHYME a b a b c c 

I stript myself naked all o're, as he:
    For so I was best arm'd, when bare.
His first pass did my liver rase: yet I
    Made home a falsify too neer:
For when my arm to its true distance came,
I nothing touch'd but a fantastick flame.

RHYME a b a b c c 

This, this is love we daily quarrel so,
    An idle Don-Quichoterie:
We whip our selves with our own twisted wo,
    And wound the ayre for a fly.
The only way t' undo this enemy
Is to laugh at the boy, and he will cry.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

What, so beyond all madnesse is the elf,
  Now he hath got out of himself!
  His fatal enemy the Bee,
  Nor his deceiv'd artillerie,
  His shackles, nor the roses bough
Ne'r half so netled him, as he is now.

RHYME a a *

See! at's own mother he is offering;
  His finger now fits any ring;
  Old Cybele he would enjoy,
  And now the girl, and now the boy.
  He proffers Jove a back caresse,
And all his love in the antipodes.

RHYME a a *

Jealous of his chast Psyche, raging he
  Quarrels with student Mercurie,
  And with a proud submissive breath
  Offers to change his darts with Death.
  He strikes at the bright eye of day,
And Juno tumbles in her milky way.

RHYME a a *

The dear sweet secrets of the gods he tells,
  And with loath'd hate lov'd heaven he swells;
  Now, like a fury, he belies
  Myriads of pure virginities,
  And swears, with this false frenzy hurl'd,
There's not a vertuous she in all the world.

RHYME a a *

Olympus he renownces, then descends,
  And makes a friendship with the fiends;
  Bids Charon be no more a slave,
  He Argos rigg'd with stars shall have,
  And triple Cerberus from below
Must leash'd t' himself with him a hunting go.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Small type of great ones, that do hum
Within this whole world's narrow room,
That with a busie hollow noise
Catch at the people's vainer voice,
And with spread sails play with their breath,
Whose very hails new christen death.
Poor Fly, caught in an airy net,
Thy wings have fetter'd now thy feet;
Where, like a Lyon in a toyl,
Howere thou keep'st a noble coyl,

RHYME a a *

And beat'st thy gen'rous breast, that o're
The plains thy fatal buzzes rore,
Till thy all-bellyd foe (round elf)
Hath quarter'd thee within himself.

RHYME a a *

  Was it not better once to play
I' th' light of a majestick ray,
Where, though too neer and bold, the fire
Might sindge thy upper down attire,
And thou i' th' storm to loose an eye.
A wing, or a self-trapping thigh:
Yet hadst thou fal'n like him, whose coil
Made fishes in the sea to broyl,
When now th'ast scap'd the noble flame;
Trapp'd basely in a slimy frame,
And free of air, thou art become
Slave to the spawn of mud and lome?

RHYME a a *

  Nor is't enough thy self do's dresse
To thy swoln lord a num'rous messe,
And by degrees thy thin veins bleed,
And piecemeal dost his poyson feed;
But now devour'd, art like to be
A net spun for thy familie,

RHYME a a *

And, straight expanded in the air,
Hang'st for thy issue too a snare.
Strange witty death and cruel ill
That, killing thee, thou thine dost kill!
Like pies, in whose entombed ark
All fowl crowd downward to a lark,
Thou art thine en'mies' sepulcher,
And in thee buriest, too, thine heir.

RHYME a a *

  Yet Fates a glory have reserv'd
For one so highly hath deserv'd.
As the rhinoceros doth dy
Under his castle-enemy,
As through the cranes trunk throat doth speed,
The aspe doth on his feeder feed;
Fall yet triumphant in thy woe,
Bound with the entrails of thy foe.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Forbear this liquid fire, Fly,
It is more fatal then the dry,
That singly, but embracing, wounds;
And this at once both burns and drowns.

RHYME a a *

The salamander, that in heat
And flames doth cool his monstrous sweat,
Whose fan a glowing cake is said,
Of this red furnace is afraid.

RHYME a a *

Viewing the ruby-christal shine,
Thou tak'st it for heaven-christalline;
Anon thou wilt be taught to groan:
'Tis an ascended Acheron.

RHYME a a *

A snow-ball heart in it let fall,
And take it out a fire-ball;
Ali icy breast in it betray'd
Breaks a destructive wild granade.

RHYME a a *

'Tis this makes Venus altars shine,
This kindles frosty Hymen's pine;
When the boy grows old in his desires,
This flambeau doth new light his fires.

RHYME a a *

Though the cold hermit over wail,
Whose sighs do freeze, and tears drop hail,
Once having pass'd this, will ne'r
Another flaming purging fear.

RHYME a a *

The vestal drinking this doth burn
Now more than in her fun'ral urn;
Her fires, that with the sun kept race,
Are now extinguish'd by her face.

RHYME a a *

The chymist, that himself doth still,
Let him but tast this limbecks bill,
And prove this sublimated bowl,
He'll swear it will calcine a soul.

RHYME a a *

Noble, and brave! now thou dost know
The false prepared decks below,
Dost thou the fatal liquor sup,
One drop, alas! thy barque blowes up.

RHYME a a *

What airy country hast to save,
Whose plagues thou'lt bury in thy grave?
For even now thou seem'st to us
On this gulphs brink a Curtius.

RHYME a a *

And now th' art faln (magnanimous Fly)
In, where thine Ocean doth fry,
Like the Sun's son, who blush'd the flood
To a complexion of blood.

RHYME a a *

Yet, see! my glad auricular
Redeems thee (though dissolv'd) a star,
Flaggy thy wings, and scorch'd thy thighs,
Thou ly'st a double sacrifice.

RHYME a a *

And now my warming, cooling breath
Shall a new life afford in death;
See! in the hospital of my hand
Already cur'd, thou fierce do'st stand.

RHYME a a *

Burnt insect! dost thou reaspire
The moist-hot-glasse and liquid fire?
I see 'tis such a pleasing pain,
Thou would'st be scorch'd and drown'd again.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Mongst the worlds wonders, there doth yet remain
One greater than the rest, that's all those o're again,
And her own self beside: A Lady, whose soft breast
Is with vast honours soul and virtues life possest.
Fair as original light first from the chaos shot,
When day in virgin-beams triumph'd, and night was not,
And as that breath infus'd in the new-breather good,
When ill unknown was dumb, and bad not understood;

RHYME a a *

Chearful, as that aspect at this world's finishing,
When cherubims clapp'd wings, and th' sons of Heaven did sing;
Chast as th' Arabian bird, who all the ayr denyes,
And ev'n in flames expires, when with her selfe she lyes.
Oh! she's as kind as drops of new faln April showers,
That on each gentle breast spring fresh perfuming flowers;
She's constant, gen'rous, fixt; she's calm, she is the all
We can of vertue, honour, faith, or glory call,
And she is (whom I thus transmit to endless fame)
Mistresse oth' world and me, and LAURA is her name.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Upon a day, when the Dog-star
Unto the world proclaim'd a war,
And poyson bark'd from black throat,
And from his jaws infection shot,

RHYME a a *

Under a deadly hen-bane shade
With slime infernal mists are made,
Met the two dreaded enemies,
Having their weapons in their eyes.

RHYME a a *

  First from his den rolls forth that load
Of spite and hate, the speckl'd toad,
And from his chaps a foam doth spawn,
Such as the loathed three heads yawn;
Defies his foe with a fell spit,
To wade through death to meet with it;
Then in his self the lymbeck turns,
And his elixir'd poyson urns.
Arachne, once the fear oth' maid
Coelestial, thus unto her pray'd:
Heaven's blew-ey'd daughter, thine own mother!
The Python-killing Sun's thy brother.

RHYME a a *

Oh! thou, from gods that didst descend,
With a poor virgin to contend,
Shall seed of earth and hell ere be
A rival in thy victorie?
Pallas assents: for now long time
And pity had clean rins'd her crime;
When straight she doth with active fire
Her many legged foe inspire.
Have you not seen a charact lie
A great cathedral in the sea,
Under whose Babylonian walls
A small thin frigot almshouse stalls?
So in his slime the toad doth float
And th' spyder by, but seems his boat.
And now the naumachie begins;
Close to the surface her self spins:
Arachne, when her foe lets flye
A broad-side of his breath too high,

RHYME a a *

That's over-shot, the wisely-stout,
Advised maid doth tack about;
And now her pitchy barque doth sweat,
Chaf'd in her own black fury wet;
Lasie and cold before, she brings
New fires to her contracted stings,
And with discolour'd spumes doth blast
The herbs that to their center hast.
Now to the neighb'ring henbane top
Arachne hath her self wound up,
And thence, from its dilated leaves,
By her own cordage downwards weaves,

RHYME a a *

And doth her town of foe attack,
And storms the rampiers of his back;
Which taken in her colours spread,
March to th' citadel of's head.
Now as in witty torturing Spain,
The brain is vext to vex the brain,
Where hereticks bare heads are arm'd
In a close helm, and in it charm'd
An overgrown and meagre rat,
That peece-meal nibbles himself fat;
So on the toads blew-checquer'd scull
The spider gluttons her self full.
And vomiting her Stygian seeds,
Her poyson on his poyson feeds.
Thus the invenom'd toad, now grown
Big with more poyson than his own,
Doth gather all his pow'rs, and shakes
His stormer in's disgorged lakes;

RHYME a a *

And wounded now, apace crawls on
To his next plantane surgeon,
With whose rich balm no sooner drest,
But purged is his sick swoln breast;
And as a glorious combatant,
That only rests awhile to pant,
Then with repeated strength and scars,
That smarting fire him new to wars,
Deals blows that thick themselves prevent,
As they would gain the time he spent.

RHYME a a *

  So the disdaining angry toad,
That calls but a thin useless load,
His fatal feared self comes back
With unknown venome fill'd to crack.
Th' amased spider, now untwin'd,
Hath crept up, and her self new lin'd
With fresh salt foams and mists, that blast
The ambient air as they past.
And now me thinks a Sphynx's wing
I pluck, and do not write, but sting;
With their black blood my pale inks blent,
Gall's but a faint ingredient.

RHYME a a *

The pol'tick toad doth now withdraw,
Warn'd, higher in CAMPANIA.
There wisely doth, intrenched deep,
His body in a body keep,
And leaves a wide and open pass
T' invite the foe up to his jaws,
Which there within a foggy blind
With fourscore fire-arms were lin'd.
The gen'rous active spider doubts
More ambuscadoes than redoubts;
So within shot she doth pickear,
Now gall's the flank, and now the rear;
As that the toad in's own dispite
Must change the manner of his fight,
Who, like a glorious general,
With one home-charge lets fly at all.
Chaf'd with a fourfold ven'mous foam
Of scorn, revenge, his foes and 's own,
He seats him in his loathed chair,
New-made him by each mornings air,

RHYME a a *

With glowing eyes he doth survey
Th' undaunted hoast he calls his prey;
Then his dark spume he gred'ly laps,
And shows the foe his grave, his chaps.

RHYME a a *

  Whilst the quick wary Amazon
Of 'vantage takes occasion,
And with her troop of leggs carreers
In a full speed with all her speers.
Down (as some mountain on a mouse)
On her small cot he flings his house;
Without the poyson of the elf,
The toad had like t' have burst himself:
For sage Arachne with good heed
Had stopt herself upon full speed,
And, 's body now disorder'd, on
She falls to execution.
The passive toad now only can
Contemn and suffer.  Here began
The wronged maids ingenious rage,
Which his heart venome must asswage.
One eye she hath spet out, strange smother,
When one flame doth put out another,

RHYME a a *

And one eye wittily spar'd, that he
Might but behold his miserie.
She on each spot a wound doth print,
And each speck hath a sting within't;
Till he but one new blister is,
And swells his own periphrasis.
Then fainting, sick, and yellow-pale,
She baths him with her sulph'rous stale;
Thus slacked is her Stygian fire,
And she vouchsafes now to retire.
Anon the toad begins to pant,
Bethinks him of th' almighty plant,
And lest he peece-meal should be sped,
Wisely doth finish himself dead.
Whilst the gay girl, as was her fate,
Doth wanton and luxuriate,
And crowns her conqu'ring head all or
With fatal leaves of hellebore.

RHYME a a *

Not guessing at the pretious aid
Was lent her by the heavenly maid.
The neer expiring toad now rowls
Himself in lazy bloody scrowls,
To th' sov'raign salve of all his ills,
That only life and health distills.
But loe! a terror above all,
That ever yet did him befall!

RHYME a a *

  Pallas, still mindful of her foe,
(Whilst they did with each fires glow)
Had to the place the spiders lar
Dispath'd before the ev'nings star.
He learned was in Natures laws,
Of all her foliage knew the cause,
And 'mongst the rest in his choice want
Unplanted had this plantane plant.

RHYME a a *

  The all-confounded toad doth see
His life fled with his remedie,
And in a glorious despair
First burst himself, and next the air;
Then with a dismal horred yell
Beats down his loathsome breath to hell.

RHYME a a *

  But what inestimable bliss
This to the sated virgin is,
Who, as before of her fiend foe,
Now full is of her goddess too!
She from her fertile womb hath spun
Her stateliest pavillion,
Whilst all her silken flags display,
And her triumphant banners play;

RHYME a a *

Where Pallas she ith' midst doth praise,
And counterfeits her brothers rayes,
Nor will she her dear lar forget,
Victorious by his benefit,
Whose roof inchanted she doth free
From haunting gnat and goblin bee,
Who, trapp'd in her prepared toyle,
To their destruction keep a coyle.

RHYME a a *

  Then she unlocks the toad's dire head,
Within whose cell is treasured
That pretious stone, which she doth call
A noble recompence for all,
And to her lar doth it present,
Of his fair aid a monument.

RHYME a a *

  Wise emblem of our politick world,
Sage Snayl, within thine own self curl'd,
Instruct me softly to make hast,
Whilst these my feet go slowly fast.

RHYME a a *

  Compendious Snayl! thou seem'st to me
Large Euclid's strict epitome;
And in each diagram dost fling
Thee from the point unto the ring.
A figure now trianglare,
An oval now, and now a square,
And then a serpentine, dost crawl,
Now a straight line, now crook'd, now all.

RHYME a a *

  Preventing rival of the day,
Th' art up and openest thy ray;
And ere the morn cradles the moon,
Th' art broke into a beauteous noon.
Then, when the Sun sups in the deep,
Thy silver horns e're Cinthia's peep;
And thou, from thine own liquid bed,
New Phoebus, heav'st thy pleasant head.

RHYME a a *

  Who shall a name for thee create,
Deep riddle of mysterious state?
Bold Nature, that gives common birth
To all products of seas and earth,
Of thee, as earth-quakes, is afraid,
Nor will thy dire deliv'ry aid.

RHYME a a *

  Thou, thine own daughter, then, and sire,
That son and mother art intire,
That big still with thy self dost go,
And liv'st an aged embrio;
That like the cubbs of India,
Thou from thy self a while dost play;
But frighted with a dog or gun,
In thine own belly thou dost run,
And as thy house was thine own womb,
So thine own womb concludes thy tomb.

RHYME a a *

  But now I must (analys'd king)
Thy oeconomick virtues sing;
Thou great stay'd husband still within,
Thou thee that's thine dost discipline;
And when thou art to progress bent,
Thou mov'st thy self and tenement,
As warlike Scythians travayl'd, you
Remove your men and city too;

RHYME a a *

Then, after a sad dearth and rain,
Thou scatterest thy silver train;
And when the trees grow nak'd and old,
Thou cloathest them with cloth of gold,
Which from thy bowels thou dost spin,
And draw from the rich mines within.

RHYME a a *

  Now hast thou chang'd thee, saint, and made
Thy self a fane that's cupula'd;
And in thy wreathed cloister thou
Walkest thine own gray fryer too;
Strickt and lock'd up, th'art hood all ore,
And ne'r eliminat'st thy dore.
On sallads thou dost feed severe,
And 'stead of beads thou drop'st a tear,
And when to rest each calls the bell,
Thou sleep'st within thy marble cell,
Where, in dark contemplation plac'd,
The sweets of Nature thou dost tast,

RHYME a a *

Who now with time thy days resolve,
And in a jelly thee dissolve,
Like a shot star, which doth repair
Upward, and rarifie the air.

RHYME a a *

The Centaur, Syren, I foregoe;
Those have been sung, and lowdly too:
Nor of the mixed Sphynx Ile write,
Nor the renown'd Hermaphrodite.
Behold! this huddle doth appear
Of horses, coach and charioteer,
That moveth him by traverse law,
And doth himself both drive and draw;
Then, when the Sunn the south doth winne,
He baits him hot in his own inne.
I heard a grave and austere clark
Resolv'd him pilot both and barque;

RHYME a a *

That, like the fam'd ship of TREVERE,
Did on the shore himself lavere:
Yet the authentick do beleeve,
Who keep their judgement in their sleeve,
That he is his own double man,
And sick still carries his sedan:
Or that like dames i'th land of Luyck,
He wears his everlasting huyck.
But banisht, I admire his fate,
Since neither ostracisme of state,
Nor a perpetual exile,
Can force this virtue, change his soyl:
For, wheresoever he doth go,
He wanders with his country too.

RHYME a a *

  Sir, your sad absence I complain, as earth
Her long-hid spring, that gave her verdures birth,
Who now her cheerful aromatick head
Shrinks in her cold and dismal widow'd bed;
Whilst the false sun her lover doth him move
Below, and to th' antipodes make love.

RHYME a a *

  What fate was mine, when in mine obscure cave
(Shut up almost close prisoner in a grave)
Your beams could reach me through this vault of night,
And canton the dark dungeon with light!
Whence me (as gen'rous Spahys) you unbound,
Whilst I now know my self both free and crown'd.

RHYME a a *

  But as at Meccha's tombe, the devout blind
Pilgrim (great husband of his sight and mind)
Pays to no other object this chast prise,
Then with hot earth anoynts out both his eyes:
So having seen your dazling glories store,
It is enough, and sin for to see more.

RHYME a a *

  Or, do you thus those pretious rayes withdraw
To whet my dull beams, keep my bold in aw?
Or, are you gentle and compassionate,
You will not reach me Regulus his fate?
Brave prince! who, eagle-ey'd of eagle kind,
Wert blindly damn'd to look thine own self blind!

RHYME a a *

  But oh, return those fires, too cruel-nice!
For whilst you fear me cindars, see, I'm ice!
A nummed speaking clod and mine own show,
My self congeal'd, a man cut out in snow:

RHYME a a *

Return those living fires.  Thou, who that vast
Double advantage from one-ey'd Heav'n hast,
Look with one sun, though 't but obliquely be,
And if not shine, vouchsafe to wink on me.

RHYME a a *

  Perceive you not a gentle, gliding heat,
And quick'ning warmth, that makes the statua sweat;
As rev'rend Ducaleon's black-flung stone,
Whose rough outside softens to skin, anon
Each crusty vein with wet red is suppli'd,
Whilst nought of stone but in its heart doth 'bide.

RHYME a a *

  So from the rugged north, where your soft stay
Hath stampt them a meridian and kind day;
Where now each A LA MODE inhabitant
Himself and 's manners both do pay you rent,
And 'bout your house (your pallace) doth resort,
And 'spite of fate and war creates a court.

RHYME a a *

  So from the taught north, when you shall return,
To glad those looks that ever since did mourn,
When men uncloathed of themselves you'l see,
Then start new made, fit, what they ought to be;
Hast! hast! you, that your eyes on rare sights feed:
For thus the golden triumph is decreed.

RHYME a a *

  The twice-born god, still gay and ever young,
With ivie crown'd, first leads the glorious throng:
He Ariadne's starry coronet
Designs for th' brighter beams of Amoret;
Then doth he broach his throne, and singing quaff
Unto her health his pipe of god-head off.

RHYME a a *

  Him follow the recanting, vexing Nine
Who, wise, now sing thy lasting fame in wine;
Whilst Phoebus, not from th' east, your feast t' adorn,
But from th' inspir'd Canaries, rose this morn.

RHYME a a *

  Now you are come, winds in their caverns sit,
And nothing breaths, but new-inlarged wit.
Hark!  One proclaims it piacle to be sad,
And th' people call 't religion to be mad.

RHYME a a *

  But now, as at a coronation,
When noyse, the guard, and trumpets are oreblown,
The silent commons mark their princes way,
And with still reverence both look and pray;
So they amaz'd expecting do adore,
And count the rest but pageantry before.

RHYME a a *

  Behold! an hoast of virgins, pure as th' air
In her first face, ere mists durst vayl her hair:
Their snowy vests, white as their whiter skin,
Or their far chaster whiter thoughts within:
Roses they breath'd and strew'd, as if the fine
Heaven did to earth his wreath of swets resign;
They sang aloud: "THRICE, OH THRICE HAPPY, THEY
THAT CAN, LIKE THESE, IN LOVE BOTH YIELD AND SWAY."

RHYME a a *

  Next herald Fame (a purple clowd her bears),
In an imbroider'd coat of eyes and ears,
Proclaims the triumph, and these lovers glory,
Then in a book of steel records the story.

RHYME a a *

  And now a youth of more than god-like form
Did th' inward minds of the dumb throng alarm;
All nak'd, each part betray'd unto the eye,
Chastly: for neither sex ow'd he or she.
And this was heav'nly love.  By his bright hand,
A boy of worse than earthly stuff did stand;
His bow broke, his fires out, and his wings clipt,
And the black slave from all his false flames stript;

RHYME a a *

Whose eyes were new-restor'd but to confesse
This day's bright blisse, and his own wretchednesse;
Who, swell'd with envy, bursting with disdain,
Did cry to cry, and weep them out again.

RHYME a a *

  And now what heav'n must I invade, what sphere
Rifle of all her stars, t' inthrone her there?
No!  Phoebus, by thy boys fate we beware
Th' unruly flames o'th' firebrand, thy carr;
Although, she there once plac'd, thou, Sun, shouldst see
Thy day both nobler governed and thee.
Drive on, Bootes, thy cold heavy wayn,
Then grease thy wheels with amber in the main,
And Neptune, thou to thy false Thetis gallop,
Appollo's set within thy bed of scallop:

RHYME a a *

Whilst Amoret, on the reconciled winds
Mounted, and drawn by six caelestial minds,
She armed was with innocence and fire,
That did not burn; for it was chast desire;
Whilst a new light doth gild the standers by.
Behold! it was a day shot from her eye;
Chafing perfumes oth' East did throng and sweat,
But by her breath they melting back were beat.

RHYME a a *

A crown of yet-nere-lighted stars she wore,
In her soft hand a bleeding heart she bore,

RHYME a a *

Then a wing'd crier thrice aloud did call:
LET FAME PROCLAIM THIS ONE GREAT PRISE FOR ALL.

RHYME a a *

  By her a lady that might be call'd fair,
And justly, but that Amoret was there,
Was pris'ner led; th' unvalewed robe she wore
Made infinite lay lovers to adore,
Who vainly tempt her rescue (madly bold)
Chained in sixteen thousand links of gold;
Chrysetta thus (loaden with treasures) slave
Did strow the pass with pearls, and her way pave.

RHYME a a *

  But loe! the glorious cause of all this high
True heav'nly state, brave Philamore, draws nigh,
Who, not himself, more seems himself to be,
And with a sacred extasie doth see!
Fix'd and unmov'd on 's pillars he doth stay,
And joy transforms him his own statua;
Nor hath he pow'r to breath [n]or strength to greet
The gentle offers of his Amoret,
Who now amaz'd at 's noble breast doth knock,
And with a kiss his gen'rous heart unlock;
Whilst she and the whole pomp doth enter there,
Whence her nor Time nor Fate shall ever tear.
But whether am I hurl'd? ho! back! awake
From thy glad trance: to thine old sorrow take!

RHYME a a *

Thus, after view of all the Indies store,
The slave returns unto his chain and oar;
Thus poets, who all night in blest heav'ns dwell,
Are call'd next morn to their true living hell;
So I unthrifty, to myself untrue,
Rise cloath'd with real wants, 'cause wanting you,
And what substantial riches I possesse,
I must to these unvalued dreams confesse.

RHYME a a *

  But all our clowds shall be oreblown, when thee
In our horizon bright once more we see;
When thy dear presence shall our souls new-dress,
And spring an universal cheerfulnesse;
When we shall be orewhelm'd in joy, like they
That change their night for a vast half-year's day.

RHYME a a *

  Then shall the wretched few, that do repine,
See and recant their blasphemies in wine;
Then shall they grieve, that thought I've sung too free,
High and aloud of thy true worth and thee,
And their fowl heresies and lips submit
To th' all-forgiving breath of Amoret;

RHYME a a *

And me alone their angers object call,
That from my height so miserably did fall;
And crie out my invention thin and poor,
Who have said nought, since I could say no more.

RHYME a a *

  Frank, wil't live unhandsomely? trust not too far
Thy self to waving seas: for what thy star,
Calculated by sure event, must be,
Look in the glassy-epithete, and see.

RHYME a a *

  Yet settle here your rest, and take your state,
And in calm halcyon's nest ev'n build your fate;
Prethee lye down securely, Frank, and keep
With as much no noyse the inconstant deep
As its inhabitants; nay, stedfast stand,
As if discover'd were a New-found-land,
Fit for plantation here.  Dream, dream still,
Lull'd in Dione's cradle; dream, untill
Horrour awake your sense, and you now find
Your self a bubbled pastime for the wind;
And in loose Thetis blankets torn and tost.
Frank, to undo thy self why art at cost?

RHYME a a *

  Nor be too confident, fix'd on the shore:
For even that too borrows from the store
Of her rich neighbour, since now wisest know
(And this to Galileo's judgement ow),
The palsie earth it self is every jot
As frail, inconstant, waveing, as that blot

RHYME a a *

We lay upon the deep, that sometimes lies
Chang'd, you would think, with 's botoms properties;
But this eternal, strange Ixion's wheel
Of giddy earth ne'er whirling leaves to reel,
Till all things are inverted, till they are
Turn'd to that antick confus'd state they were.

RHYME a a *

  Who loves the golden mean, doth safely want
A cobwebb'd cot and wrongs entail'd upon't;
He richly needs a pallace for to breed
Vipers and moths, that on their feeder feed;
The toy that we (too true) a mistress call,
Whose looking-glass and feather weighs up all;
And cloaths which larks would play with in the sun,
That mock him in the night, when 's course is run.

RHYME a a *

  To rear an edifice by art so high,
That envy should not reach it with her eye,
Nay, with a thought come neer it.  Wouldst thou know,
How such a structure should be raisd, build low.
The blust'ring winds invisible rough stroak
More often shakes the stubborn'st, prop'rest oak;
And in proud turrets we behold withal,
'Tis the imperial top declines to fall:
Nor does Heav'n's lightning strike the humble vales,
But high-aspiring mounts batters and scales.

RHYME a a *

  A breast of proof defies all shocks of Fate,
Fears in the best, hopes in worser state;
Heaven forbid that, as of old, time ever
Flourish'd in spring so contrary, now never.
That mighty breath, which blew foul Winter hither,
Can eas'ly puffe it to a fairer weather.
Why dost despair then, Frank?  Aeolus has
A Zephyrus as well as Boreas.

RHYME a a *

  'Tis a false sequel, soloecisme 'gainst those
Precepts by fortune giv'n us, to suppose
That, 'cause it is now ill, 't will ere be so;
Apollo doth not always bend his bow;
But oft, uncrowned of his beams divine,
With his soft harp awakes the sleeping Nine.

RHYME a a *

  In strictest things magnanimous appear,
Greater in hope, howere thy fate, then fear:
Draw all your sails in quickly, though no storm
Threaten your ruine with a sad alarm;
For tell me how they differ, tell me, pray,
A cloudy tempest and a too fair day?

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Behold! three sister-wonders, in whom met,
Distinct and chast, the splendrous counterfeit
Of Juno, Venus and the warlike Maid,
Each in their three divinities array'd;
The majesty and state of Heav'ns great Queen,
And when she treats the gods, her noble meen;
The sweet victorious beauties and desires
O' th' sea-born princess, empresse too of fires;
The sacred arts and glorious lawrels torn
From the fair brow o' th' goddesse father-born;
All these were quarter'd in each snowy coat,
With canton'd honours of their own, to boot.
Paris, by fate new-wak'd from his dead cell,
Is charg'd to give his doom impossible.
He views in each the brav'ry of all Ide;
Whilst one, as once three, doth his soul divide.
Then sighs so equally they're glorious all:
WHAT PITY THE WHOLE WORLD IS BUT ONE BALL!

RHYME a a *

  If Pliny, Lord High Treasurer of all
Natures exchequer shuffled in this our ball,
Peinture her richer rival did admire,
And cry'd she wrought with more almighty fire,
That judg'd the unnumber'd issue of her scrowl,
Infinite and various as her mother soul,
That contemplation into matter brought,
Body'd Ideas, and could form a thought.
Why do I pause to couch the cataract,
And the grosse pearls from our dull eyes abstract,
That, pow'rful Lilly, now awaken'd we
This new creation may behold by thee?

RHYME a a *

  To thy victorious pencil all, that eyes
And minds call reach, do bow.  The deities
Bold Poets first but feign'd, you do and make,
And from your awe they our devotion take.
Your beauteous pallet first defin'd Love's Queen,
And made her in her heav'nly colours seen;
You strung the bow of the Bandite her son,
And tipp'd his arrowes with religion.
Neptune as unknown as his fish might dwell,
But that you seat him in his throne of shell.

RHYME a a *

The thunderers artillery and brand,
You fancied Rome in his fantastick hand;
And the pale frights, the pains, and fears of hell
First from your sullen melancholy fell.
Who cleft th' infernal dog's loath'd head in three,
And spun out Hydra's fifty necks? by thee
As prepossess'd w' enjoy th' Elizian plain,
Which but before was flatter'd in our brain.
Who ere yet view'd airs child invisible,
A hollow voice, but in thy subtile skill?
Faint stamm'ring Eccho you so draw, that we
The very repercussion do see.
  Cheat-HOCUS-POCUS-Nature an assay
O' th' spring affords us: praesto, and away!
You all the year do chain her and her fruits,
Roots to their beds, and flowers to their roots.
Have not mine eyes feasted i' th' frozen Zone
Upon a fresh new-grown collation
Of apples, unknown sweets, that seem'd to me
Hanging to tempt as on the fatal tree,
So delicately limn'd I vow'd to try
My appetite impos'd upon my eye?
  You, sir, alone, fame, and all-conqu'ring rime,
File the set teeth of all-devouring time.

RHYME a a *

When beauty once thy vertuous paint hath on,
Age needs not call her to vermilion;
Her beams nere shed or change like th' hair of day,
She scatters fresh her everlasting ray.
Nay, from her ashes her fair virgin fire
Ascends, that doth new massacres conspire,
Whilst we wipe off the num'rous score of years,
And do behold our grandsire[s] as our peers;
With the first father of our house compare
We do the features of our new-born heir:
For though each coppied a son, they all
Meet in thy first and true original.
  Sacred! luxurious! what princesse not
But comes to you to have her self begot?
As, when first man was kneaded, from his side
Is born to's hand a ready-made-up bride.
He husband to his issue then doth play,
And for more wives remove the obstructed way:
So by your art you spring up in two noons
What could not else be form'd by fifteen suns;
Thy skill doth an'mate the prolifick flood,
And thy red oyl assimilates to blood.
  Where then, when all the world pays its respect,
Lies our transalpine barbarous neglect?
When the chast hands of pow'rful Titian
Had drawn the scourges of our God and man,
And now the top of th' altar did ascend
To crown the heav'nly piece with a bright end;
Whilst he, who in seven languages gave law,
And always, like the Sun, his subjects saw,
Did, in his robes imperial and gold,
The basis of the doubtful ladder hold.
O Charls! a nobler monument than that,
Which thou thine own executor wert at!
When to our huffling Henry there complain'd
A grieved earl, that thought his honor stain'd:

RHYME a a *

Away (frown'd he), for your own safeties, hast!
In one cheap hour ten coronets I'l cast;
But Holbeen's noble and prodigious worth
Onely the pangs of an whole age brings forth.
Henry! a word so princely saving said,
It might new raise the ruines thou hast made.
  O sacred Peincture! that dost fairly draw,
What but in mists deep inward Poets saw;
'Twixt thee and an Intelligence no odds,
That art of privy council to the gods!
By thee unto our eyes they do prefer
A stamp of their abstracted character;
Thou, that in frames eternity dost bind,
And art a written and a body'd mind;
To thee is ope the Juncto o' th' abysse,
And its conspiracy detected is;
Whilest their cabal thou to our sense dost show,
And in thy square paint'st what they threat below.
  Now, my best Lilly, let's walk hand in hand,
And smile at this un-understanding land;
Let them their own dull counterfeits adore,
Their rainbow-cloaths admire, and no more.
Within one shade of thine more substance is,
Than all their varnish'd idol-mistresses:
Whilst great Vasari and Vermander shall
Interpret the deep mystery of all,

RHYME a a *

And I unto our modern Picts shall show,
What due renown to thy fair art they owe
In the delineated lives of those,
By whom this everlasting lawrel grows.
Then, if they will not gently apprehend,
Let one great blot give to their fame an end;
Whilst no poetick flower their herse doth dresse,
But perish they and their effigies.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

    The day is curl'd about agen
    To view the splendor she was in;
        When first with hallow'd hands
The holy man knit the mysterious bands

RHYME a a *

When you two your contracted souls did move
        Like cherubims above,

RHYME a a *

As your un-understanding issue now,
In a glad sigh, a smile, a tear, a vow.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d 

    Tell me, O self-reviving Sun,
    In thy perigrination
        Hast thou beheld a pair
Twist their soft beams like these in their chast air?
As from bright numberlesse imbracing rayes
        Are sprung th' industrious dayes,
            So when they gaze,
And change their fertile eyes with the new morn,
A beauteous offspring is shot forth, not born.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d

    Be witness then, all-seeing Sun,
    Old spy, thou that thy race hast run
        In full five thousand rings;
To thee were ever purer offerings
Sent on the wings of Faith? and thou, O Night,
        Curtain of their delight,
            By these made bright,
Have you not mark'd their coelestial play,
And no more peek'd the gayeties of day?

RHYME a a b b c c c d d

    Come then, pale virgins, roses strow,
    Mingled with Ios as you go.
        The snowy ox is kill'd,
The fane with pros'lyte lads and lasses fill'd,
You too may hope the same seraphic joy,
        Old time cannot destroy,
            Nor fulnesse cloy;
When, like these, you shall stamp by sympathies
Thousands of new-born-loves with your chaste eyes.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Twas a blith prince exchang'd five hundred crowns
For a fair turnip.  Dig, dig on, O clowns
But how this comes about, Fates, can you tell,
This more then Maid of Meurs, this miracle?
Let me not live, if I think not St. Mark
Has all the oar, as well as beasts, in's ark!
No wonder 'tis he marries the rich sea,
But to betroth him to nak'd Poesie,
And with a bankrupt muse to merchandise;
His treasures beams, sure, have put out his eyes.
His conquest at Lepanto I'l let pass,
When the sick sea with turbants night-cap'd was;
And now at Candie his full courage shown,
That wan'd to a wan line the half-half moon.
This is a wreath, this is a victorie,
Caesar himself would have look'd pale to see,
And in the height of all his triumphs feel
Himself but chain'd to such a mighty wheel.

RHYME a a *

  And now me thinks we ape Augustus state,
So ugly we his high worth imitate,
Monkey his godlike glories; so that we
Keep light and form with such deformitie,
As I have seen an arrogant baboon
With a small piece of glasse zany the sun.
  Rome to her bard, who did her battails sing,
Indifferent gave to poet and to king;
With the same lawrells were his temples fraught,
Who best had written, and who best had fought;
The self same fame they equally did feel,
One's style ador'd as much as t' other's steel.
A chain or fasces she could then afford
The sons of Phoebus, we, an axe or cord;
Sometimes a coronet was her renown,
And ours, the dear prerogative of a crown.
In marble statu'd walks great Lucan lay,
And now we walk, our own pale statua.
They the whole year with roses crownd would dine,
And we in all December know no wine;
Disciplin'd, dieted, sure there hath bin
Ods 'twixt a poet and a Capuchin.

RHYME a a *

  Of princes, women, wine, to sing I see
Is no apocrypha: for to rise high
Commend this olio of this lord 'tis fit:
Nay, ten to one, but you have part of it;
There is that justice left, since you maintain
His table, he should counter-feed your brain.
Then write how well he in his sack hath droll'd,
Straight there's a bottle to your chamber roll'd,
Or with embroider'd words praise his French suit,
Month hence 'tis yours with his mans, to boot;
Or but applaud his boss'd legs: two to none,
But he most nobly doth give you one.
Or spin an elegie on his false hair:
'Tis well, he cries, but living hair is dear.
Yet say that out of order ther's one curl,
And all the hopes of your reward you furl.
  Write a deep epick poem, and you may
As soon delight them as the opera,
Where they Diogenes thought in his tub,
Never so sowre did look so sweet a club.
  You that do suck for thirst your black quil's blood,
And chaw your labour'd papers for your food,
I will inform you how and what to praise,
Then skin y' in satin as young Lovelace plaies.
Beware, as you would your fierce guests, your lice,
To strip the cloath of gold from cherish'd vice;

RHYME a a *

Rather stand off with awe and reverend fear,
Hang a poetick pendant in her ear,
Court her as her adorers do their glasse,
Though that as much of a true substance has,
Whilst all the gall from your wild ink you drain,
The beauteous sweets of vertues cheeks to stain;
And in your livery let her be known,
As poor and tatter'd as in her own.
Nor write, nor speak you more of sacred writ,
But what shall force up your arrested wit.
Be chast; religion and her priests your scorn,
Whilst the vain fanes of idiots you adorn.
It is a mortal errour, you must know,
Of any to speak good, if he be so.
Rayl, till your edged breath flea your raw throat,
And burn remarks on all of gen'rous note;
Each verse be an indictment, be not free
Sanctity 't self from thy scurrility.
Libel your father, and your dam buffoon,
The noblest matrons of the isle lampoon,
Whilst Aretine and 's bodies you dispute,
And in your sheets your sister prostitute.
  Yet there belongs a sweetnesse, softnesse too,
Which you must pay, but first, pray, know to who.
There is a creature, (if I may so call
That unto which they do all prostrate fall)
Term'd mistress, when they'r angry; but, pleas'd high,
It is a princesse, saint, divinity.
To this they sacrifice the whole days light,
Then lye with their devotion all night;
For this you are to dive to the abysse,
And rob for pearl the closet of some fish.

RHYME a a *

Arabia and Sabaea you must strip
Of all their sweets, for to supply her lip;
And steal new fire from heav'n, for to repair
Her unfledg'd scalp with Berenice's hair;

RHYME a a *

As now you're in your coach: save you, bright sir,
(O, spare your thanks) is not this finer far
Then walk un-hided, when that every stone
Has knock'd acquaintance with your ankle-bone?

RHYME a a *

When your wing'd papers, like the last dove, nere
Return'd to quit you of your hope or fear,
But left you to the mercy of your host
And your days fare, a fortified toast.
  How many battels, sung in epick strain,
Would have procur'd your head thatch from the rain
Not all the arms of Thebes and Troy would get
One knife but to anatomize your meat,
A funeral elegie, with a sad boon,
Might make you (hei!) sip wine like maccaroon;

RHYME a a *

But if perchance there did a riband come,
Not the train-band so fierce with all its drum:
Yet with your torch you homeward would retire,
And heart'ly wish your bed your fun'ral pyre.
  With what a fury have I known you feed
Upon a contract and the hopes 't might speed!
Not the fair bride, impatient of delay,
Doth wish like you the beauties of that day;
Hotter than all the roasted cooks you sat
To dresse the fricace of your alphabet,
Which sometimes would be drawn dough anagrame,
Sometimes acrostick parched in the flame;
Then posies stew'd with sippets, mottos by:
Of minced verse a miserable pye.
How many knots slip'd, ere you twist their name
With th' old device, as both their heart's the same!
Whilst like to drills the feast in your false jaw
You would transmit at leisure to your maw;
Then after all your fooling, fat, and wine,
Glutton'd at last, return at home to pine.
  Tell me, O Sun, since first your beams did play
To night, and did awake the sleeping day;
Since first your steeds of light their race did start,
Did you ere blush as now?  Oh thou, that art
The common father to the base pissmire,
As well as great Alcides, did the fire
From thine owne altar which the gods adore,
Kindle the souls of gnats and wasps before?
  Who would delight in his chast eyes to see
Dormise to strike at lights of poesie?
Faction and envy now are downright rage.
Once a five-knotted whip there was, the stage:

RHYME a a *

The beadle and the executioner,
To whip small errors, and the great ones tear;
Now, as er'e Nimrod the first king, he writes:
That's strongest, th' ablest deepest bites.
The muses weeping fly their hill, to see
Their noblest sons of peace in mutinie.
Could there nought else this civil war compleat,
But poets raging with poetic heat,
Tearing themselves and th' endlesse wreath, as though
Immortal they, their wrath should be so, too?
And doubly fir'd Apollo burns to see
In silent Helicon a naumachie.
Parnassus hears these at his first alarms;
Never till now Minerva was in arms.
  O more then conqu'ror of the world, great Rome!
Thy heros did with gentleness or'e come
Thy foes themselves, but one another first,
Whilst envy stript alone was left, and burst.
The learn'd Decemviri, 'tis true, did strive,
But to add flames to keep their fame alive;
Whilst the eternal lawrel hung ith' air:
Nor of these ten sons was there found one heir.
Like to the golden tripod, it did pass
From this to this, till 't came to him, whose 'twas.
Caesar to Gallus trundled it, and he
To Maro: Maro, Naso, unto thee?
Naso to his Tibullus flung the wreath,
He to Catullus thus did bequeath.
This glorious circle, to another round,
At last the temples of their god it bound.
  I might believe at least, that each might have
A quiet fame contented in his grave,

RHYME a a *

Envy the living, not the dead, doth bite:
For after death all men receave their right.
If it be sacriledge for to profane
Their holy ashes, what is't then their flame?
He does that wrong unweeting or in ire,
As if one should put out the vestal fire.
  Let earths four quarters speak, and thou, Sun, bear
Now witnesse for thy fellow-traveller.
I was ally'd, dear Uncle, unto thee
In blood, but thou, alas, not unto me;
Your vertues, pow'rs, and mine differ'd at best,
As they whose springs you saw, the east and west.
Let me awhile be twisted in thy shine,
And pay my due devotions at thy shrine.
  Might learned Waynman rise, who went with thee
In thy heav'ns work beside divinity,
I should sit still; or mighty Falkland stand
To justifie with breath his pow'rful hand;
The glory, that doth circle your pale urn,
Might hallow'd still and undefiled burn:
But I forbear. Flames, that are wildly thrown
At sacred heads, curle back upon their own;
Sleep, heavenly Sands, whilst what they do or write,
Is to give God himself and you your right.
  There is not in my mind one sullen fate
Of old, but is concentred in our state:
Vandall ore-runners, Goths in literature:
Ploughmen that would Parnassus new-manure;
Ringers of verse that all-in-chime,
And toll the changes upon every rime.
A mercer now by th' yard does measure ore
An ode, which was but by the foot before;
Deals you an ell of epigram, and swears
It is the strongest and the finest wears.

RHYME a a *

No wonder, if a drawer verses rack,
If 'tis not his, 't may be the spir't of sack;
Whilst the fair bar-maid stroaks the muses teat,
For milk to make the posset up compleat.
  Arise, thou rev'rend shade, great Johnson, rise!
Break through thy marble natural disguise!
Behold a mist of insects, whose meer breath
Will melt thy hallow'd leaden house of death.
What was Crispinus, that you should defie
The age for him?  He durst not look so high
As your immortal rod, he still did stand
Honour'd, and held his forehead to thy brand.
These scorpions, with which we have to do,
Are fiends, not only small but deadly too.
Well mightst thou rive thy quill up to the back,
And scrue thy lyre's grave chords, untill they crack.
For though once hell resented musick, these
Divels will not, but are in worse disease.
How would thy masc'line spirit, father Ben,
Sweat to behold basely deposed men,
Justled from the prerog'tive of their bed,
Whilst wives are per'wig'd with their husbands head?
Each snatches the male quill from his faint hand,
And must both nobler write and understand,
He to her fury the soft plume doth bow:
O pen, nere truely justly slit till now!
Now as her self a poem she doth dresse.
And curls a line, as she would do a tresse;
Powders a sonnet as she does her hair,
Then prostitutes them both to publick aire.
Nor is 't enough, that they their faces blind
With a false dye; but they must paint their mind,

RHYME a a *

In meeter scold, and in scann'd order brawl,
Yet there's one Sapho left may save them all.
  But now let me recal my passion.
Oh! (from a noble father, nobler son)
You, that alone are the Clarissimi,
And the whole gen'rous state of Venice be,
It shall not be recorded Sanazar
Shall boast inthron'd alone this new made star;
You, whose correcting sweetnesse hath forbad
Shame to the good, and glory to the bad;
Whose honour hath ev'n into vertue tam'd
These swarms, that now so angerly I nam'd.
Forgive what thus distemper'd I indite:
For it is hard a SATYRE not to write.
Yet, as a virgin that heats all her blood
At the first motion of bad understood,
Then, at meer thought of fair chastity,
Straight cools again the tempests of her sea:
  So when to you I my devotions raise,
  All wrath and storms do end in calm and praise.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Cleft as the top of the inspired hill,
Struggles the soul of my divided quill,
Whilst this foot doth the watry mount aspire,
That Sinai's living and enlivening fire,
Behold my powers storm'd by a twisted light
O' th' Sun and his, first kindled his sight,
And my lost thoughts invoke the prince of day,
My right to th' spring of it and him do pray.

RHYME a a *

  Say, happy youth, crown'd with a heav'nly ray
Of the first flame, and interwreathed bay,
Inform my soul in labour to begin,
Ios or Anthems, Poeans or a Hymne.
Shall I a hecatombe on thy tripod slay,
Or my devotions at thy altar pay?
While which t' adore th' amaz'd world cannot tell,
The sublime Urim or deep oracle.

RHYME a a *

  Heark! how the moving chords temper our brain,
As when Apollo serenades the main,
Old Ocean smooths his sullen furrow'd front,
And Nereids do glide soft measures on't;
Whilst th' air puts on its sleekest, smoothest face,
And each doth turn the others looking-glasse;
So by the sinewy lyre now strook we see
Into soft calms all storm of poesie,
And former thundering and lightning lines,
And verse now in its native lustre shines.

RHYME a a *

  How wert thou hid within thyself! how shut!
Thy pretious Iliads lock'd up in a nut!
Not hearing of thee thou dost break out strong,
Invading forty thousand men in song;
And we, secure in our thin empty heat,
Now find ourselves at once surprised and beat,
Whilst the most valiant of our wits now sue,
Fling down their arms, ask quarter too of you.

RHYME a a *

  So cabin'd up in its disguis'd coarse rust,
And scurf'd all ore with its unseemly crust,
The diamond, from 'midst the humbler stones,
Sparkling shoots forth the price of nations.
  Ye safe unriddlers of the stars, pray tell,
By what name shall I stamp my miracle?
Thou strange inverted Aeson, that leap'st ore
From thy first infancy into fourscore,

RHYME a a *

That to thine own self hast the midwife play'd,
And from thy brain spring'st forth the heav'nly maid!
Thou staffe of him bore him, that bore our sins,
Which, but set down, to bloom and bear begins!
Thou rod of Aaron, with one motion hurl'd,
Bud'st a perfume of flowers through the world!
You strange calcined seeds within a glass,
Each species Idaea spring'st as 'twas!
Bright vestal flame that, kindled but ev'n now,
For ever dost thy sacred fires throw!

RHYME a a *

  Thus the repeated acts of Nestor's age,
That now had three times ore out-liv'd the stage,
And all those beams contracted into one,
Alcides in his cradle hath outdone.

RHYME a a *

  But all these flour'shing hiews, with which I die
Thy virgin paper, now are vain as I:
For 'bove the poets Heav'n th' art taught to shine
And move, as in thy proper crystalline;
Whence that mole-hill Parnassus thou dost view,
And us small ants there dabbling in its dew;
Whence thy seraphic soul such hymns doth play,
As those to which first danced the first day,

RHYME a a *

Where with a thorn from the world-ransoming wreath
Thou stung, dost antiphons and anthems breathe;
Where with an Angels quil dip'd i' th' Lambs blood,
Thou sing'st our Pelicans all-saving flood,
And bath'st thy thoughts in ever-living streams,
Rench'd from earth's tainted, fat and heavy steams.
There move translated youth inroll'd i' th' quire,
That only doth with wholy lays inspire;
To whom his burning coach Eliah sent,
And th' royal prophet-priest his harp hath lent;
Which thou dost tune in consort unto those
Clap wings for ever at each hallow'd close:
Whilst we, now weak and fainting in our praise,
Sick echo ore thy Halleluiahs.

RHYME a a *

  I'm un-ore-clowded, too! free from the mist!
The blind and late Heaven's-eyes great Occulist,
Obscured with the false fires of his sceme,
Not half those souls are lightned by this theme.

RHYME a a *

  Unhappy murmurers, that still repine
(After th' Eclipse our Sun doth brighter shine),
Recant your false grief, and your true joys know;
Your blisse is endlesse, as you fear'd your woe!
What fort'nate flood is this! what storm of wit!
Oh, who would live, and not ore-whelm'd in it?

RHYME a a *

No more a fatal Deluge shall be hurl'd:
This inundation hath sav'd the world.
Once more the mighty Fletcher doth arise,
Roab'd in a vest studded with stars and eyes
Of all his former glories; his last worth
Imbroiderd with what yet light ere brought forth.
See! in this glad farewel he doth appear
Stuck with the Constellations of his Sphere,

RHYME a a *

Fearing we numb'd fear'd no flagration,
Hath curl'd all his fires in this one ONE:
Which (as they guard his hallowed chast urn)
The dull aproaching hereticks do burn.

RHYME a a *

  Fletcher at his adieu carouses thus
To the luxurious ingenious,
As Cleopatra did of old out-vie,
Th' un-numb'red dishes of her Anthony,
When (he at th' empty board a wonderer)
Smiling she calls for pearl and vinegar,
First pledges him in's BREATH, then at one draught
Swallows THREE KINGDOMS of To HIS BEST THOUGHT.

RHYME a a *

  Hear, oh ye valiant writers, and subscribe;
(His force set by) y'are conquer'd by this bribe.
Though you hold out your selves, he doth commit
In this a sacred treason in your wit;
Although in poems desperately stout,
Give up: this overture must buy you out.

RHYME a a *

  Thus with some prodigal us'rer 't doth fare,
That keeps his gold still vayl'd, his steel-breast bare;
That doth exceed his coffers all but's eye,
And his eyes' idol the wing'd Deity:
That cannot lock his mines with half the art
As some rich beauty doth his wretched heart;
Wild at his real poverty, and so wise
To win her, turns himself into a prise.
First startles her with th' emerald Mad-Lover
The ruby Arcas, least she should recover
Her dazled thought, a Diamond he throws,
Splendid in all the bright Aspatia's woes;
Then to sum up the abstract of his store,
He flings a rope of Pearl of forty more.
Ah, see! the stagg'ring virtue faints! which he
Beholding, darts his Wealths Epitome;
And now, to consummate her wished fall,
Shows this one Carbuncle, that darkens all.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

What means this stately tablature,
  The ballance of thy streins,
Which seems, in stead of sifting pure,
  T' extend and rack thy veins?
Thy Odes first their own harmony did break:
For singing, troth, is but in tune to speak.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Nor trus thy golden feet and wings.
  It may be thought false melody
T' ascend to heav'n by silver strings;
  This is Urania's heraldry.
Thy royal poem now we may extol,
As truly Luna blazon'd upon Sol.

RHYME a b a b c c 

As when Amphion first did call
  Each listning stone from's den;
And with his lute did form the wall,
  But with his words the men;
So in your twisted numbers now you thus
Not only stocks perswade, but ravish us.

RHYME a b a b c c 

Thus do your ayrs eccho ore
  The notes and anthems of the sphaeres,
And their whole consort back restore,
  As if earth too would blesse Heav'ns ears;
But yet the spoaks, by which they scal'd so high,
Gamble hath wisely laid of UT RE MI.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Sir, how unravell'd is the golden fleece:
Men, that could only fool at FOX AND GEESE,
Are new-made polititians by thy book,
And both can judge and conquer with a look.
The hidden fate of princes you unfold;
Court, clergy, commons, by your law control'd.
Strange, serious wantoning all that they
Bluster'd and clutter'd for, you PLAY.

RHYME a a *

  Tis not from cheap thanks thinly to repay
Th' immortal grove of thy fair-order'd bay
Thou planted'st round my humble fane, that I
Stick on thy hearse this sprig of Elegie:
Nor that your soul so fast was link'd in me,
That now I've both, since't has forsaken thee:
That thus I stand a Swisse before thy gate,
And dare, for such another, time and fate.
Alas! our faiths made different essays,
Our Minds and Merits brake two several ways;
Justice commands I wake thy learned dust,
And truth, in whom all causes center must.

RHYME a a *

  Behold! when but a youth, thou fierce didst whip
Upright the crooked age, and gilt vice strip;
A senator praetext, that knew'st to sway
The fasces, yet under the ferula;
Rank'd with the sage, ere blossome did thy chin,
Sleeked without, and hair all ore within,
Who in the school could'st argue as in schools:
Thy lessons were ev'n academie rules.
So that fair Cam saw thee matriculate,
At once a tyro and a graduate.

RHYME a a *

  At nineteen, what ESSAYES have we beheld!
That well might have the book of Dogmas swell'd;
Tough Paradoxes, such as Tully's, thou
Didst heat thee with, when snowy was thy brow,
When thy undown'd face mov'd the Nine to shake,
And of the Muses did a decad make.
What shall I say? by what allusion bold?
NONE BUT THE SUN WAS ERE SO YOUNG AND OLD.

RHYME a a *

  Young reverend shade, ascend awhile! whilst we
Now celebrate this posthume victorie,
This victory, that doth contract in death
Ev'n all the pow'rs and labours of thy breath.
Like the Judean Hero, in thy fall
Thou pull'st the house of learning on us all.
And as that soldier conquest doubted not,
Who but one splinter had of Castriot,

RHYME a a *

But would assault ev'n death so strongly charmd,
And naked oppose rocks, with his bone arm'd;
So we, secure in this fair relique, stand
The slings and darts shot by each profane hand.
These soveraign leaves thou left'st us are become
Sear clothes against all Times infection.

RHYME a a *

  Sacred Hierocles, whose heav'nly thought
First acted ore this comment, ere it wrote,
Thou hast so spirited, elixir'd, we
Conceive there is a noble alchymie,
That's turning of this gold to something more
Pretious than gold, we never knew before.
Who now shall doubt the metempsychosis
Of the great Author, that shall peruse this?
Let others dream thy shadow wandering strays
In th' Elizian mazes hid with bays;
Or that, snatcht up in th' upper region,
'Tis kindled there a constellation;
I have inform'd me, and declare with ease
THY SOUL IS FLED INTO HIEROCLES.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  To pay my love to thee, and pay it so,
As honest men should what they justly owe,
Were to write better of thy life, then can
The assured'st pen of the most worthy man.
Such was thy composition, such thy mind,
Improv'd from vertue, and from vice refin'd;
Thy youth an abstract of the world's best parts,
Invr'd to arms and exercis'd to arts,
Which, with the vigour of a man, became
Thine and thy countries piramids of fame.
Two glorious lights to guide our hopeful youth
Into the paths of honour and of truth.
  These parts (so rarely met) made up in thee,
What man should in his full perfection be:

RHYME a a *

So sweet a temper into every sence
And each affection breath'd an influence,
As smooth'd them to a calme, which still withstood
The ruffling passions of untamed blood,
Without a wrinckle in thy face, to show
Thy stable breast could a disturbance know.
In fortune humble, constant in mischance;
Expert in both, and both serv'd to advance
Thy name by various trialls of thy spirit,
And give the testimony of thy merit.
Valiant to envy of the bravest men,
And learned to an undisputed pen;
Good as the best in both and great, but yet
No dangerous courage nor offensive wit.
These ever serv'd the one for to defend,
The other, nobly to advance thy friend,

RHYME a a *

Under which title I have found my name
Fix'd in the living chronicle of fame
To times succeeding: yet I hence must go,
Displeas'd I cannot celebrate thee so.
But what respect, acknowledgement and love,
What these together, when improv'd, improve:
Call it by any name (so it express
Ought like a tribute to thy worthyness,
And may my bounden gratitude become)
LOVELACE, I offer at thy honour'd tomb.
  And though thy vertues many friends have bred
To love thee liveing, and lament thee dead,
In characters far better couch'd then these,
Mine will not blott thy fame, nor theirs encrease.
'Twas by thine own great merits rais'd so high,
That, maugre time and fate, it shall not dye.

RHYME a a *

The rose and other fragrant flowers smell best,
When they are pluck'd and worn in hand or brest,
So this fair flow'r of vertue, this rare bud
Of wit, smells now as fresh as when he stood;
And in these Posthume-Poems lets us know,
He on the banks of Helicon did grow.
The beauty of his soul did correspond
With his sweet out-side: nay, it went beyond.

RHYME a a *

  Lovelace, the minion of the Thespian dames,
  Apollo's darling, born with Enthean flames,
  Which in his numbers wave and shine so clear,
  As sparks refracted from rich gemmes appear;
Such flames that may inspire, and atoms cast,
To make new poets not like him in hast.

RHYME a a *

  Pardon (blest shade), that I thus crowd to be
'Mong those that sin unto thy memory,
And that I think unvalu'd reliques spread,
And am the first that pillages the dead;
Since who would be thy mourner as befits,
But an officious sacriledge commits.
How my tears strive to do thee fairer right,
And from the characters divide my sight.
Untill it (dimmer) a new torrent swells,
And what obscur'd it, falls my spectacles

RHYME a a *

As they would not be wept, but weep the eyes,
But the weak bubbles of mortalitie;

RHYME a a *

Until our griefs are drawn up by the Sun,
And that (too) drop the exhalation.
How in thy dust we humble now our pride,
And bring thee a whole people mortifi'd!
For who expects not death, now thou art gone,
Shows his low folly, not religion.
  Can the poetick heaven still hold on
The golden dance, when the first mover's gon?

RHYME a a *

And the snatch'd fires (which circularly hurl'd)
In their strong rapture glimmer to the world,
And not stupendiously rather rise
The tapers unto these solemnities?
  Can the chords move in tune, when thou dost dye,
At once their universal harmony?
But where Apollo's harp (with murmur) laid,
Had to the stones a melody convey'd,

RHYME a a *

They by some pebble summon'd would reply
In loud results to every battery;
Thus do we come unto thy marble room,
To eccho from the musick of thy tombe.
  May we dare speak thee dead, that wouldest be
In thy remove only not such as we?
No wonder, the advance is from us hid;
Earth could not lift thee higher then it did!
And thou, that didst grow up so ever nigh,
Art but now gone to immortality!
So near to where thou art, thou here didst dwell,
The change to thee is less perceptible.

RHYME a a *

  Thy but unably-comprehending clay,
To what could not be circumscrib'd, gave way,
And the more spacious tennant to return,
Crack'd (in the two restrain'd estate) its urn.
That is but left to a successive trust;
The soul's first buried in his bodies dust.
  Thou more thy self, now thou art less confin'd,
Art not concern'd in what is left behind;
While we sustain the losse that thou art gone,
Un-essenc'd in the separation;
And he that weeps thy funerall, in one
Is pious to the widdow'd nation.
  And under what (now) covert must I sing,
Secure as if beneath a cherub's wing;
When thou hast tane thy flight hence, and art nigh
In place to some related hierarchie,
Where a bright wreath of glories doth but set
Upon thy head an equal coronet;
And thou, above our humble converse gon,
Canst but be reach'd by contemplation.
  Our lutes (as thine was touch'd) were vocall by,
And thence receiv'd the soul by sympathy,
That did above the threds inspiring creep,
And with soft whispers broke the am'rous sleep;
Which now no more (mov'd with the sweet surprise)
Awake into delicious rapsodies;

RHYME a a *

But with their silent mistress do comply,
And fast in undisturbed slumbers lye.
  How from thy first ascent thou didst disperse
A blushing warmth throughout the universe,
While near the morns Lucasta's fires did glow,
And to the earth a purer dawn did throw.
We ever saw thee in the roll of fame
Advancing thy already deathless name;
And though it could but be above its fate,
Thou would'st, however, super-errogate.
  Now as in Venice, when the wanton State
Before a Spaniard spread their crowded plate,
He made it the sage business of his eye
To find the root of the wild treasury;
So learn't from that exchequer but the more
To rate his masters vegetable ore.

RHYME a a *

Thus when the Greek and Latin muse we read,
As but the cold inscriptions of the dead,
We to advantage then admired thee,
Who did'st live on still with thy poesie;
And in our proud enjoyments never knew
The end of the unruly wealth that grew.
But now we have the last dear ingots gain'd,
And the free vein (however rich) is drein'd;
Though what thou hast bequeathed us, no space
Of this worlds span of time shall ere embrace.
But as who sometimes knew not to conclude
Upon the waters strange vicissitude,
Did to the ocean himself commit,
That it might comprehend what could not it,
So we in our endeavours must out-done
Be swallowed up within thy Helicon.
  Thou, who art layd up in thy precious cave,
And from the hollow spaces of thy grave,

RHYME a a *

We still may mourn in tune, but must alone
Hereafter hope to quaver out a grone;
No more the chirping sonnets with shrill notes
Must henceforth volley from our treble throtes;
But each sad accent must be humour'd well
To the deep solemn organ of thy cell.
  Why should some rude hand carve thy sacred stone,
And there incise a cheap inscription?
When we can shed the tribute of our tears
So long, till the relenting marble wears;
Which shall such order in their cadence keep,
That they a native epitaph shall weep;
Untill each letter spelt distinctly lyes,
Cut by the mystick droppings of our eyes.

RHYME a a *

Me thinks, when kings, prophets, and poets dye,
We should not bid men weep, nor ask them why,
But the great loss should by instinct impair
The nations, like a pestilential ayr,
And in a moment men should feel the cramp
Of grief, like persons poyson'd with a damp.
All things in nature should their death deplore,
And the sun look less lovely than before;
The fixed stars should change their constant spaces,
And comets cast abroad their flagrant faces.
Yet still we see princes and poets fall
Without their proper pomp of funerall;
Men look about, as if they nere had known
The poets lawrell or the princes crown;

RHYME a a *

Lovelace hath long been dead, and he can be
Oblig'd to no man for an elegie.
Are you all turn'd to silence, or did he
Retain the only sap of poesie,
That kept all branches living? must his fall
Set an eternal period upon all?
So when a spring-tide doth begin to fly
From the green shoar, each neighbouring creek grows dry.
But why do I so pettishly detract
An age that is so perfect, so exact?
In all things excellent, it is a fame
Or glory to deceased Lovelace name:
For he is weak in wit, who doth deprave
Anothers worth to make his own seem brave;

RHYME a a *

And this was not his aim: nor is it mine.
I now conceive the scope of their designe,
Which is with one consent to bring and burn
Contributary incence on his urn,
Where each mans love and fancy shall be try'd,
As when great Johnson or brave Shakespear dyed.
Wits must unite: for ignorance, we see,
Hath got a great train of artillerie:
Yet neither shall nor can it blast the fame
And honour of deceased Lovelace name,
Whose own LUCASTA can support his credit
Amongst all such who knowingly have read it;
But who that praise can by desert discusse
Due to those poems that are posthumous?

RHYME a a *

And if the last conceptions are the best,
Those by degrees do much transcend the rest;
So full, so fluent, that they richly sute
With Orpheus lire, or with Anacreons lute,
And he shall melt his wing, that shall aspire
To reach a fancy or one accent higher.
Holland and France have known his nobler parts,
And found him excellent in arms and arts.
To sum up all, few men of fame but know,
He was TAM MARTI, QUAM MERCURIO.

RHYME a a *

  Thy pious hand, planting fraternal bayes,
Deserving is of most egregious praise;
Since 'tis the organ doth to us convey
From a descended sun so bright a ray.
Clear spirit! how much we are bound to thee
For this so great a liberalitie,
The truer worth of which by much exceeds
The western wealth, which such contention breeds!
Like the Infusing-God, from the well-head
Of poesie you have besprinkled
Our brows with holy drops, the very last,
Which from your Brother's happy pen were cast:

RHYME a a *

Yet as the last, the best; such matchlesse skill
From his divine alembick did distill.
Your honour'd Brother in the Elyzian shade
Will joy to know himself a laureat made
By your religious care, and that his urn
Doth him on earth immortal life return.
Your self you have a good physician shown
To his much grieved friends and to your own,

RHYME a a *

In giving this elixir'd medecine,
For greatest grief a soveraign anodine.
  Sir, from your Brother y' have convey'd us bliss;
Now, since your genius so concurs with his,
Let your own quill our next enjoyments frame;
All must be rich, that's grac'd with Lovelace name.

RHYME a a *

Great son of Mars, and of Minerva too!
With what oblations must we come to woo
Thy sacred soul to look down from above,
And see how much thy memory we love,
Whose happy pen so pleased amorous ears,
And, lifting bright LUCASTA to the sphears,
Her in the star-bespangled orb did set
Above fair Ariadnes coronet,
Leaving a pattern to succeeding wits,
By which to sing forth their Pythonick fits.

RHYME a a *

Shall we bring tears and sighs? no, no! then we
Should but bemone our selves for loosing thee,
Or else thy happiness seem to deny,
Or to repine at thy felicity.
Then, whilst we chant out thine immortal praise,
Our offerings shall be onely sprigs of bays;
And if our tears will needs their brinks out-fly,
We'l weep them forth into an elegy,
To tell the world, how deep fates wounded wit,
When Atropos the lovely Lovelace hit!
How th' active fire, which cloath'd thy gen'rous mind,
Consum'd the water, and the earth calcin'd

RHYME a a *

Untill a stronger heat by death was given,
Which sublimated thy poor soul to heaven.
Thou knew'st right well to guide the warlike steed,
And yet could'st court the Muses with full speed
And such success, that the inspiring Nine
Have fill'd their Thespian fountain so with brine.
Henceforth we can expect no lyrick lay,
But biting satyres through the world must stray.
Bellona joyns with fair Erato too,
And with the Destinies do keep adoe,
Whom thus she queries: could not you awhile
Reprieve his life, until another file
Of poems such as these had been drawn up?
The fates reply'd that thou wert taken up,
A sacrifice unto the deities;
Since things most perfect please their holy eyes,
And that no other victim could be found
With so much learning and true virtue crown'd.
Since it is so, in peace for ever rest;
Tis very just that God should have the best.

RHYME a a *

Lovelace is dead! then let the world return
To its first chaos, mufled in its urn;
The stars and elements together lye,
Drench'd in perpetual obscurity,
And the whole machine in confusion be,
As immethodick as an anarchie.
May the great eye of day weep out his light,
Pale Cynthia leave the regiment of night,
The galaxia, all in sables dight,
Send forth no corruscations to our sight,
The Sister-Graces and the sacred Nine,
Statu'd with grief, attend upon his shrine,
Whose worth, whose loss, should we but truly rate,
'Twould puzzle our arithmetic to state
Th' accompt of vertu's so transcendent high,
Number and value reach infinity.

RHYME a a *

Did I pronounce him dead! no, no! he lives,
And from his aromatique cell he gives
Spice-breathed fumes, whose odoriferous scent
(In zephre-gales which never can be spent)
Doth spread it self abroad, and much out-vies
The eastern bird in her self-sacrifice;
Or Father Phoebus, who to th' world derives
Such various and such multiformed lives,
Took notice that brave Lovelace did inspire
The universe with his Promethean fire,
And snatcht him hence, before his thread was spun,
En'ving that here should be another Sun.   

RHYME a a *

Tread (reader) gently, gently ore
The happy dust beneath this floor:
For in this narrow vault is set
An alablaster cabinet,
Wherein both arts and arms were put,
Like Homers Iliads in a nut,
Till Death with slow and easie pace
Snatcht the bright jewell from the case;
And now, transform'd, he doth arise
A constellation in the skies,
Teaching the blinded world the way,
Through night, to startle into day:
And shipwrackt shades, with steady hand,
He steers unto th' Elizian land.

RHYME a b a b

From Clee to heaven the beacon burns,
 The shires have seen it plain,
From north and south the sign returns
 And beacons burn again.

RHYME a b a b

Look left, look right, the hills are bright,
 The dales are light between,
Because 'tis fifty years to-night
 That God has saved the Queen.

RHYME a b a b

Now, when the flame they watch not towers
 About the soil they trod,
Lads, we'll remember friends of ours
 Who shared the work with God.

RHYME a b a b

To skies that knit their heartstrings right,
 To fields that bred them brave,
The saviours come not home to-night:
 Themselves they could not save.

RHYME a b a b

It dawns in Asia, tombstones show
 And Shropshire names are read;
And the Nile spills his overflow
 Beside the Severn's dead.

RHYME a b a b

We pledge in peace by farm and town
 The Queen they served in war,
And fire the beacons up and down
 The land they perished for.

RHYME a b a b

"God Save the Queen" we living sing,
 From height to height 'tis heard;
And with the rest your voices ring,
 Lads of the Fifty-third.

RHYME a b a b

Oh, God will save her, fear you not:
 Be you the men you've been,
Get you the sons your fathers got,
 And God will Save the Queen.

TITLE Loveliest of Trees, the Cherry Now

RHYME a a b b

Loveliest of trees, the cherry now
Is hung with bloom along the bough,
And stands about the woodland ride
Wearing white for Eastertide.

RHYME a a b b

Now, of my threescore years and ten,
Twenty will not come again,
And take from seventy springs a score,
It only leaves me fifty more.

RHYME a a b b

And since to look at things in bloom
Fifty springs are little room,
About the woodlands I will go
To see the cherry hung with snow.

TITLE Leave your home behind, lad

RHYME a b c b

Leave your home behind, lad,
 And reach your friends your hand,
And go, and luck go with you
 While Ludlow tower shall stand.

RHYME a b c b

Oh, come you home of Sunday
 When Ludlow streets are still
And Ludlow bells are calling
 To farm and lane and mill,

RHYME a b c b

Or come you home of Monday
 When Ludlow market hums
And Ludlow chimes are playing
 "The conquering hero comes,"

RHYME a b c b

Come you home a hero,
 Or come not home at all,
The lads you leave will mind you
 Till Ludlow tower shall fall.

RHYME a b c b

And you will list the bugle
 That blows in lands of morn,
And make the foes of England
 Be sorry you were born.

RHYME a b c b

And you till trump of doomsday
 On lands of morn may lie,
And make the hearts of comrades
 Be heavy where you die.

RHYME a b c b

Leave your home behind you,
 Your friends by field and town
Oh, town and field will mind you
 Till Ludlow tower is down.

TITLE Reveille

RHYME a b a b

Wake: the silver dusk returning
 Up the beach of darkness brims,
And the ship of sunrise burning
 Strands upon the eastern rims.

RHYME a b a b

Wake: the vaulted shadow shatters,
 Trampled to the floor it spanned,
And the tent of night in tatters
 Straws the sky-pavilioned land.

RHYME a b a b

Up, lad, up, 'tis late for lying:
 Hear the drums of morning play;
Hark, the empty highways crying
 "Who'll beyond the hills away?"

RHYME a b a b

Towns and countries woo together,
 Forelands beacon, belfries call;
Never lad that trod on leather
 Lived to feast his heart with all.

RHYME a b a b

Up, lad: thews that lie and cumber
 Sunlit pallets never thrive;
Morns abed and daylight slumber
 Were not meant for man alive.

RHYME a b a b

Clay lies still, but blood's a rover;
 Breath's a ware that will not keep
Up, lad: when the journey's over
 There'll be time enough to sleep.

TITLE Oh see how thick the goldcup flowers

RHYME a b a b c d e d

Oh see how thick the goldcup flowers
 Are lying in field and lane,
With dandelions to tell the hours
 That never are told again.
Oh may I squire you round the meads
 And pick you posies gay?
-'Twill do no harm to take my arm.
 "You may, young man, you may."

RHYME a b a b c d e d

Ah, spring was sent for lass and lad,
 'Tis now the blood runs gold,
And man and maid had best be glad
 Before the world is old.
What flowers to-day may flower to-morrow,
 But never as good as new.
-Suppose I wound my arm right round-
 " 'Tis true, young man, 'tis true."

RHYME a b a b c d e d

Some lads there are, 'tis shame to say,
 That only court to thieve,
And once they bear the bloom away
 'Tis little enough they leave.
Then keep your heart for men like me
 And safe from trustless chaps.
My love is true and all for you.
 "Perhaps, young man, perhaps."

RHYME a b a b c d e d

Oh, look in my eyes, then, can you doubt?
 -Why, 'tis a mile from town.
How green the grass is all about!
 We might as well sit down.
-Ah, life, what is it but a flower?
 Why must true lovers sigh?
Be kind, have pity, my own, my pretty,-
 "Good-bye, young man, good-bye."

TITLE When the lad for longing sighs

RHYME a b a b

When the lad for longing sighs,
 Mute and dull of cheer and pale,
If at death's own door he lies,
 Maiden, you can heal his ail.

RHYME a b a b

Lovers' ills are all to buy:
 The wan look, the hollow tone,
The hung head, the sunken eye,
 You can have them for your own.

RHYME a b a b

Buy them, buy them: eve and morn
 Lovers' ills are all to sell.
Then you can lie down forlorn;
 But the lover will be well.

TITLE When smoke stood up from Ludlow

RHYME a b c b b

When smoke stood up from Ludlow,
 And mist blew off from Teme,
And blithe afield to ploughing
 Against the morning beam
 I strode beside my team,

RHYME a b c b b

The blackbird in the coppice
 Looked out to see me stride,
And hearkened as I whistled
 The tramping team beside,
 And fluted and replied:

RHYME a b c b b

"Lie down, lie down, young yeoman;
 What use to rise and rise?
Rise man a thousand mornings
 Yet down at last he lies,
 And then the man is wise."

RHYME a b c b b

I heard the tune he sang me,
 And spied his yellow bill;
I picked a stone and aimed it
 And threw it with a will:
 Then the bird was still.

RHYME a b c b b

Then my soul within me
 Took up the blackbird's strain,
And still beside the horses
 Along the dewy lane
 It Sang the song again:

RHYME a b c b b

"Lie down, lie down, young yeoman;
 The sun moves always west;
The road one treads to labour
 Will lead one home to rest,
 And that will be the best."

TITLE Farewell to barn and stack and tree

RHYME a b a b

"Farewell to barn and stack and tree,
 Farewell to Severn shore.
Terence, look your last at me,
 For I come home no more.

RHYME a b a b

"The sun burns on the half-mown hill,
 By now the blood is dried;
And Maurice amongst the hay lies still
 And my knife is in his side."

RHYME a b a b

"My mother thinks us long away;
 'Tis time the field were mown.
She had two sons at rising day,
 To-night she'll be alone."

RHYME a b a b

"And here's a bloody hand to shake,
 And oh, man, here's good-bye;
We'll sweat no more on scythe and rake,
 My bloody hands and I."

RHYME a b a b

"I wish you strength to bring you pride,
 And a love to keep you clean,
And I wish you luck, come Lammastide,
 At racing on the green."

RHYME a b a b

"Long for me the rick will wait,
 And long will wait the fold,
And long will stand the empty plate,
 And dinner will be cold."

TITLE On moonlit heath and lonesome bank

RHYME a b a b

On moonlit heath and lonesome bank
 The sheep beside me graze;
And yon the gallows used to clank
 Fast by the four cross ways.

RHYME a b a b

A careless shepherd once would keep
 The flocks by moonlight there, [1]
And high amongst the glimmering sheep
 The dead man stood on air.

RHYME a b a b

They hang us now in Shrewsbury jail:
 The whistles blow forlorn,
And trains all night groan on the rail
 To men that die at morn.

RHYME a b a b

There sleeps in Shrewsbury jail to-night,
 Or wakes, as may betide,
A better lad, if things went right,
 Than most that sleep outside.

RHYME a b a b

And naked to the hangman's noose
 The morning clocks will ring
A neck God made for other use
 Than strangling in a string.

RHYME a b a b

And sharp the link of life will snap,
 And dead on air will stand
Heels that held up as straight a chap
 As treads upon the land.

RHYME a b a b

So here I'll watch the night and wait
 To see the morning shine,
When he will hear the stroke of eight
 And not the stroke of nine;

RHYME a b a b

And wish my friend as sound a sleep
 As lads' I did not know,
That shepherded the moonlit sheep
 A hundred years ago.

TITLE The sun at noon to higher air

RHYME a a b b

The sun at noon to higher air,
Unharnessing the silver Pair
That late before his chariot swam,
Rides on the gold wool of the Ram.

RHYME a a b b

So braver notes the storm-cock sings
To start the rusted wheel of things,
And brutes in field and brutes in pen
Leap that the world goes round again.

RHYME a a b b

The boys are up the woods with day
To fetch the daffodils away,
And home at noonday from the hills
They bring no dearth of daffodils.

RHYME a a b b

Afield for palms the girls repair,
And sure enough the palms are there,
And each will find by hedge or pond
Her waving silver-tufted wand.

RHYME a a b b

In farm and field through all the shire
The eye beholds the heart's desire;
Ah, let not only mine be vain,
For lovers should be loved again.

TITLE On your midnight pallet lying

RHYME a b a b c c b

On your midnight pallet lying
 Listen, and undo the door:
Lads that waste the light in sighing
 In the dark should sigh no more;
Night should ease a lover's sorrow;
Therefore, since I go to-morrow;
 Pity me before.

RHYME a b a b c c b

In the land to which I travel,
 The far dwelling, let me say-
Once, if here the couch is gravel,
 In a kinder bed I lay,
And the breast the darnel smothers
Rested once upon another's
 When it was not clay.

TITLE When I watch the living meet

RHYME a b a b

When I watch the living meet,
 And the moving pageant file
Warm and breathing through the street
 Where I lodge a little while,

RHYME a b a b

If the heats of hate and lust
 In the house of flesh are strong,
Let me mind the house of dust
 Where my sojourn shall be long.

RHYME a b a b

In the nation that is not
 Nothing stands that stood before;
There revenges are forgot,
 And the hater hates no more;

RHYME a b a b

Lovers lying two and two
 Ask not whom they sleep beside,
And the bridegroom all night through
 Never turns him to the bride.

TITLE When I was one-and-twenty

RHYME a b c b c d a c

When I was one-and-twenty
 I heard a wise man say,
"Give crowns and pounds and guineas
 But not your heart away;
Give pearls away and rubies
 But keep your fancy free."
But I was one-and-twenty,
 No use to talk to me.

RHYME a b c b a d a d

When I was one-and-twenty
 I heard him say again,
"The heart out of the bosom
 Was never given in vain;
'Tis paid with sighs a plenty
 And sold for endless rue."
And I am two-and-twenty,
 And oh, 'tis true, 'tis true.

TITLE There pass the careless people

RHYME a b c b

There pass the careless people
 That call their souls their own:
Here by the road I loiter,
 How idle and alone.

RHYME a b c b

Ah, past the plunge of plummet,
 In seas I cannot sound,
My heart and soul and senses,
 World without end, are drowned.

RHYME a b c b

His folly has not fellow
 Beneath the blue of day
That gives to man or woman
 His heart and soul away.

RHYME a b c b

There flowers no balm to sain him
 From east of earth to west
That's lost for everlasting
 The heart out of his breast.

RHYME a b c b

Here by the labouring highway
 With empty hands I stroll:
Sea-deep, till doomsday morning,
 Lie lost my heart and soul.

TITLE Look not in my eyes, for fear

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Look not in my eyes, for fear
 They mirror true the sight I see,
And there you find your face too clear
 And love it and be lost like me.
One the long nights through must lie
 Spent in star-defeated sighs,
But why should you as well as I
 Perish? gaze not in my eyes.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

A Grecian lad, as I hear tell,
 One that many loved in vain,
Looked into a forest well
 And never looked away again.
There, when the turf in springtime flowers,
 With downward eye and gazes sad,
Stands amid the glancing showers
 A jonquil, not a Grecian lad.

TITLE It nods and curtseys and recovers

RHYME a b a b

It nods and curtseys and recovers
 When the wind blows above,
The nettle on the graves of lovers
 That hanged themselves for love.

RHYME a b a b

The nettle nods, the wind blows over,
 The man, he does not move,
The lover of the grave, the lover
 That hanged himself for love.

TITLE Twice a week the winter thorough

RHYME a b a b

Twice a week the winter thorough
 Here stood I to keep the goal:
Football then was fighting sorrow
 For the young man's soul.

RHYME a b a b

Now in May time to the wicket
 Out I march with bat and pad:
See the son of grief at cricket
 Trying to be glad.

RHYME a b a b

Try I will; no harm in trying:
 Wonder 'tis how little mirth
Keeps the bones of man from lying
 On the bed of earth.

TITLE Oh, when I was in love with you

RHYME a b a b

Oh, when I was in love with you,
 Then I was clean and brave,
And miles around the wonder grew
 How well did I behave.

RHYME a b a b

And now the fancy passes by,
 And nothing will remain,
And miles around they'll say that I
 Am quite myself again.

TITLE The time you won your town the race

RHYME a a b b

The time you won your town the race
We chaired you through the market-place;
Man and boy stood cheering by,
And home we brought you shoulder-high.

RHYME a a b b

To-day, the road all runners come,
Shoulder-high we bring you home,
And set you at your threshold down,
Townsman of a stiller town.

RHYME a a b b

Smart lad, to slip betimes away
From fields where glory does not stay
And early though the laurel grows
It withers quicker than the rose.

RHYME a a b b

Eyes the shady night has shut
Cannot see the record cut,
And silence sounds no worse than cheers
After earth has stopped the ears:

RHYME a a b b

Now you will not swell the rout
Of lads that wore their honours out,
Runners whom renown outran
And the name died before the man.

RHYME a a b b

So set, before its echoes fade,
The fleet foot on the sill of shade,
And hold to the low lintel up
The still-defended challenge-cup.

RHYME a a b b

And round that early-laurelled head
Will flock to gaze the strengthless dead,
And find unwithered on its curls
The garland briefer than a girl's.

TITLE Oh fair enough are sky and plain

RHYME a b a b

Oh fair enough are sky and plain,
 But I know fairer far:
Those are as beautiful again
 That in the water are;

RHYME a b a b

The pools and rivers wash so clean
 The trees and clouds and air,
The like on earth was never seen,
 And oh that I were there.

RHYME a b a b

These are the thoughts I often think
 As I stand gazing down
In act upon the cressy brink
 To strip and dive and drown;

RHYME a b a b

But in the golden-sanded brooks
 And azure meres I spy
A silly lad that longs and looks
 And wishes he were I.

TITLE In summertime on Bredon

RHYME a b c b b

In summertime on Bredon
 The bells they sound so clear;
Round both the shires they ring them
 In steeples far and near,
 A happy noise to hear.

RHYME a b c b b

Here of a Sunday morning
 My love and I would lie
And see the coloured counties,
 And hear the larks so high
 About us in the sky.

RHYME a b c b b

The bells would ring to call her
 In valleys miles away:
"Come all to church, good people;
 Good people, come and pray."
 But here my love would stay.

RHYME a b c b b

And I would turn and answer
 Among the springing thyme,
"Oh, peal upon our wedding,
 And we will hear the chime,
 And come to church in time."

RHYME a b c b b

But when the snows at Christmas
 On Bredon top were strown,
My love rose up so early
 And stole out unbeknown
 And went to church alone.

RHYME a b c b b

They tolled the one bell only,
 Groom there was none to see,
The mourners followed after,
 And so to church went she,
 And would not wait for me.

RHYME a b c b b

The bells they sound on Bredon,
 And still the steeples hum.
"Come all to church, good people,"-
 Oh, noisy bells, be dumb;
 I hear you, I will come.

TITLE The street sounds to the soldiers' tread

RHYME a b a b

The street sounds to the soldiers' tread,
 And out we troop to see:
A single redcoat turns his head,
 He turns and looks at me.

RHYME a b a b

My man, from sky to sky's so far,
 We never crossed before;
Such leagues apart the world's ends are,
 We're like to meet no more;

RHYME a b a b

What thoughts at heart have you and I
 We cannot stop to tell;
But dead or living, drunk or dry,
 Soldier, I wish you well.

TITLE The lads in their hundreds

RHYME a b a b

The lads in their hundreds to Ludlow come in for the fair,
 There's men from the barn and the forge and the mill and the fold,
The lads for the girls and the lads for the liquor are there,
 And there with the rest are the lads that will never be old.

RHYME a b a b

There's chaps from the town and the field and the till and the cart,
 And many to count are the stalwart, and many the brave,
And many the handsome of face and the handsome of heart,
 And few that will carry their looks or their truth to the grave.

RHYME a b a b

I wish one could know them, I wish there were tokens to tell
 The fortunate fellows that now you can never discern;
And then one could talk with them friendly and wish them farewell
 And watch them depart on the way that they will not return.

RHYME a b a b

But now you may stare as you like and there's nothing to scan;
 And brushing your elbow unguessed-at and not to be told
They carry back bright to the coiner the mintage of man,
 The lads that will die in their glory and never be old.

TITLE Say, lad, have you things to do

RHYME a b a b

Say, lad, have you things to do?
 Quick then, while your day's at prime.
Quick, and if 'tis work for two,
 Here am I, man: now's your time.

RHYME a b a b

Send me now, and I shall go;
 Call me, I shall hear you call;
Use me ere they lay me low
 Where a man's no use at all;

RHYME a b a b

Ere the wholesome flesh decay,
 And the willing nerve be numb,
And the lips lack breath to say,
 "No, my lad, I cannot come."

TITLE This time of year a twelvemonth past

RHYME a b a b

This time of year a twelvemonth past,
 When Fred and I would meet,
We needs must jangle, till at last
 We fought and I was beat.

RHYME a b a b

So then the summer fields about,
 Till rainy days began,
Rose Harland on her Sundays out
 Walked with the better man.

RHYME a b a b

The better man she walks with still,
 Though now 'tis not with Fred:
A lad that lives and has his will
 Is worth a dozen dead.

RHYME a b a b

Fred keeps the house all kinds of weather,
 And clay's the house he keeps;
When Rose and I walk out together
 Stock-still lies Fred and sleeps.

TITLE Along the fields as we came by

RHYME a a *

 Along the fields as we came by
A year ago, my love and I,
The aspen over stile and stone
Was talking to itself alone.
"Oh who are these that kiss and pass?
A country lover and his lass;
Two lovers looking to be wed;
And time shall put them both to bed,
But she shall lie with earth above,
And he beside another love."

RHYME a a *

 And sure enough beneath the tree
There walks another love with me,
And overhead the aspen heaves
Its rainy-sounding silver leaves;
And I spell nothing in their stir,
But now perhaps they speak to her,
And plain for her to understand
They talk about a time at hand
When I shall sleep with clover clad,
And she beside another lad.

TITLE Is my team ploughing

RHYME a b c b

"Is my team ploughing,
 That I was used to drive
And hear the harness jingle
 When I was man alive?"

RHYME a b c b

Ay, the horses trample,
 The harness jingles now;
No change though you lie under
 The land you used to plough.

RHYME a b c b

"Is football playing
 Along the river shore,
With lads to chase the leather,
 Now I stand up no more?"

RHYME a b c b

Ay, the ball is flying,
 The lads play heart and soul;
The goal stands up, the keeper
 Stands up to keep the goal.

RHYME a b c b

"Is my girl happy,
 That I thought hard to leave,
And has she tired of weeping
 As she lies down at eve?"

RHYME a b c b

Ay, she lies down lightly,
 She lies not down to weep:
Your girl is well contented.
 Be still, my lad, and sleep.

RHYME a b c b

"Is my friend hearty,
 Now I am thin and pine,
And has he found to sleep in
 A better bed than mine?"

RHYME a b c b

Yes, lad, I lie easy,
 I lie as lads would choose;
I cheer a dead man's sweetheart,
 Never ask me whose.

TITLE High the vanes of Shrewsbury gleam

RHYME a a b b

High the vanes of Shrewsbury gleam
Islanded in Severn stream;
The bridges from the steepled crest
Cross the water east and west.

RHYME a a b b

The flag of morn in conqueror's state
Enters at the English gate:
The vanquished eve, as night prevails,
Bleeds upon the road to Wales.

RHYME a a b b

Ages since the vanquished bled
Round my mother's marriage-bed;
There the ravens feasted far
About the open house of war:

RHYME a a b b

When Severn down to Buildwas ran
Coloured with the death of man,
Couched upon her brother's grave
The Saxon got me on the slave.

RHYME a a b b

The sound of fight is silent long
That began the ancient wrong;
Long the voice of tears is still
That wept of old the endless ill.

RHYME a a b b

In my heart it has not died,
The war that sleeps on Severn side;
They cease not fighting, east and west,
On the marches of my breast.

RHYME a a b b

Here the truceless armies yet
Trample, rolled in blood and sweat;
They kill and kill and never die;
And I think that each is I.

RHYME a a b b

None will part us, none undo
The knot that makes one flesh of two,
Sick with hatred, sick with pain,
Strangling-When shall we be slain?

RHYME a a b b

When shall I be dead and rid
Of the wrong my father did?
How long, how long, till spade and hearse
Put to sleep my mother's curse?

TITLE 'Tis spring; come out to ramble

RHYME a b a b b

'Tis spring; come out to ramble
 The hilly brakes around,
For under thorn and bramble
 About the hollow ground
 The primroses are found.

RHYME a b a b b

And there's the windflower chilly
 With all the winds at play,
And there's the Lenten lily
 That has not long to stay
 And dies on Easter day.

RHYME a b a b b

And since till girls go maying
 You find the primrose still,
And find the windflower playing
 With every wind at will,
 But not the daffodil,

RHYME a b a b b

Bring baskets now, and sally
 Upon the spring's array,
And bear from hill and valley
 The daffodil away
 That dies on Easter day.

TITLE Others, I am not the first

RHYME a a b b

Others, I am not the first,
Have willed more mischief than they durst:
If in the breathless night I too
Shiver now, 'tis nothing new.

RHYME a a b b

More than I, if truth were told,
Have stood and sweated hot and cold,
And through their reins in ice and fire
Fear contended with desire.

RHYME a a b b

Agued once like me were they,
But I like them shall win my way
Lastly to the bed of mould
Where there's neither heat nor cold.

RHYME a a b b

But from my grave across my brow
Plays no wind of healing now,
And fire and ice within me fight
Beneath the suffocating night.

TITLE On Wenlock Edge the wood's in trouble

RHYME a b a b

On Wenlock Edge the wood's in trouble;
 His forest fleece the Wrekin heaves;
The gale, it plies the saplings double,
 And thick on Severn snow the leaves.

RHYME a b a b

'Twould blow like this through holt and hanger
 When Uricon the city stood:
'Tis the old wind in the old anger,
 But then it threshed another wood.

RHYME a b a b

Then, 'twas before my time, the Roman
 At yonder heaving hill would stare:
The blood that warms an English yeoman,
 The thoughts that hurt him, they were there.

RHYME a b a b

There, like the wind through woods in riot,
 Through him the gale of life blew high;
The tree of man was never quiet:
 Then 'twas the Roman, now 'tis I.

RHYME a b a b

The gale, it plies the saplings double,
 It blows so hard, 'twill soon be gone:
To-day the Roman and his trouble
 Are ashes under Uricon.

TITLE From far, from eve and morning

RHYME a b c b

From far, from eve and morning
 And yon twelve-winded sky,
The stuff of life to knit me
 Blew hither: here am I.

RHYME a b c b

Now- for a breath I tarry
 Nor yet disperse apart-
Take my hand quick and tell me,
 What have you in your heart.

RHYME a b c b

Speak now, and I will answer;
 How shall I help you, say;
Ere to the wind's twelve quarters
 I take my endless way.

TITLE If truth in hearts that perish

RHYME a b c b

If truth in hearts that perish
 Could move the powers on high,
I think the love I bear you
 Should make you not to die.

RHYME a b c b

Sure, sure, if stedfast meaning,
 If single thought could save,
The world might end to-morrow,
 You should not see the grave.

RHYME a b c b

This long and sure-set liking,
 This boundless will to please,
-Oh, you should live for ever
 If there were help in these.

RHYME a b c b

But now, since all is idle,
 To this lost heart be kind,
Ere to a town you journey
 Where friends are ill to find.

TITLE Oh, sick I am to see you

RHYME a a b b

_ "Oh, sick I am to see you, will you never let me be?
You may be good for something, but you are not good for me.
Oh, go where you are wanted, for you are not wanted here." _
And that was all the farewell when I parted from my dear.

RHYME a a b b

"I will go where I am wanted, to a lady born and bred
Who will dress me free for nothing in a uniform of red;
She will not be sick to see me if I only keep it clean:
I will go where I am wanted for a soldier of the Queen."

RHYME a a b b

"I will go where I am wanted, for the sergeant does not mind;
He may be sick to see me but he treats me very kind:
He gives me beer and breakfast and a ribbon for my cap,
And I never knew a sweetheart spend her money on a chap."

RHYME a a b b

"I will go where I am wanted, where there's room for one or two,
And the men are none too many for the work there is to do;
Where the standing line wears thinner and the dropping dead lie thick;
And the enemies of England they shall see me and be sick."

TITLE On the idle hill of summer

RHYME a b a b

On the idle hill of summer,
 Sleepy with the flow of streams,
Far I hear the steady drummer
 Drumming like a noise in dreams.

RHYME a b a b

Far and near and low and louder
 On the roads of earth go by,
Dear to friends and food for powder,
 Soldiers marching, all to die.

RHYME a b a b

East and west on fields forgotten
 Bleach the bones of comrades slain,
Lovely lads and dead and rotten;
 None that go return again.

RHYME a b a b

Far the calling bugles hollo,
 High the screaming fife replies,
Gay the files of scarlet follow:
 Woman bore me, I will rise.

TITLE White in the moon the long road lies

RHYME a b a b

White in the moon the long road lies,
 The moon stands blank above;
White in the moon the long road lies
 That leads me from my love.

RHYME a b a b

Still hangs the hedge without a gust,
 Still, still the shadows stay:
My feet upon the moonlit dust
 Pursue the ceaseless way.

RHYME a b a b

The world is round, so travellers tell,
 And straight though reach the track,
Trudge on, trudge on, 'twill all be well,
 The way will guide one back.

RHYME a b a b

But ere the circle homeward hies
 Far, far must it remove:
White in the moon the long road lies
 That leads me from my love.

TITLE As through the wild green hills of Wyre

RHYME a a *

 As through the wild green hills of Wyre
The train ran, changing sky and shire,
And far behind, a fading crest,
Low in the forsaken west
Sank the high-reared head of Clee,
My hand lay empty on my knee.
Aching on my knee it lay:
That morning half a shire away
So many an honest fellow's fist
Had well-nigh wrung it from the wrist.
Hand, said I, since now we part
From fields and men we know by heart,
From strangers' faces, strangers' lands,-
Hand, you have held true fellows' hands.
Be clean then; rot before you do
A thing they'd not believe of you.
You and I must keep from shame
In London streets the Shropshire name;
On banks of Thames they must not say
Severn breeds worse men than they;
And friends abroad must bear in mind
Friends at home they leave behind.
Oh, I shall be stiff and cold
When I forget you, hearts of gold;
The land where I shall mind you not
Is the land where all's forgot.
And if my foot returns no more
To Teme nor Corve nor Severn shore,
Luck, my lads, be with you still
By falling stream and standing hill,
By chiming tower and whispering tree,
Men that made a man of me.
About your work in town and farm
Still you'll keep my head from harm,
Still you'll help me, hands that gave
A grasp to friend me to the grave.

TITLE The winds out of the west land blow

RHYME a b a b

The winds out of the west land blow,
 My friends have breathed them there;
Warm with the blood of lads I know
 Comes east the sighing air.

RHYME a b a b

It fanned their temples, filled their lungs,
 Scattered their forelocks free;
My friends made words of it with tongues
 That talk no more to me.

RHYME a b a b

Their voices, dying as they fly,
 Thick on the wind are sown;
The names of men blow soundless by,
 My fellows' and my own.

RHYME a b a b

Oh lads, at home I heard you plain,
 But here your speech is still,
And down the sighing wind in vain
 You hollo from the hill.

RHYME a b a b

The wind and I, we both were there,
 But neither long abode;
Now through the friendless world we fare
 And sigh upon the road.

TITLE 'Tis time, I think by Wenlock town

RHYME a b a b

'Tis time, I think by Wenlock town
 The golden broom should blow;
The hawthorn sprinkled up and down
 Should charge the land with snow.

RHYME a b a b

Spring will not wait the loiterer's time
 Who keeps so long away;
So others wear the broom and climb
 The hedgerows heaped with may.

RHYME a b a b

Oh tarnish late on Wenlock Edge,
 Gold that I never see;
Lie long, high snowdrifts in the hedge
 That will not shower on me.

TITLE Into my heart an air that kills

RHYME a b a b

Into my heart an air that kills
 From yon far country blows:
What are those blue remembered hills,
 What spires, what farms are those?

RHYME a b a b

That is the land of lost content,
 I see it shining plain,
The happy highways where I went
 And cannot come again.

TITLE In my own shire, if I was sad

RHYME a a *

 In my own shire, if I was sad
Homely comforters I had:
The earth, because my heart was sore,
Sorrowed for the son she bore;
And standing hills, long to remain,
Shared their short-lived comrade's pain.
And bound for the same bourn as I,
On every road I wandered by,
Trod beside me, close and dear,
The beautiful and death-struck year:
Whether in the woodland brown
I heard the beechnut rustle down,
And saw the purple crocus pale
Flower about the autumn dale;
Or littering far the fields of May
Lady-smocks a-bleaching lay,
And like a skylit water stood
The bluebells in the azured wood.

RHYME a a *

 Yonder, lightening other loads,
The seasons range the country roads,
But here in London streets I ken
No such helpmates, only men;
And these are not in plight to bear,
If they would, another's care.
They have enough as 'tis: I see
In many an eye that measures me
The mortal sickness of a mind
Too unhappy to be kind.
Undone with misery, all they can
Is to hate their fellow man;
And till they drop they needs must still
Look at you and wish you ill.

TITLE Once in the wind of morning

RHYME a b c b

Once in the wind of morning
 I ranged the thymy wold;
The world-wide air was azure
 And all the brooks ran gold.

RHYME a b c b

There through the dews beside me
 Behold a youth that trod,
With feathered cap on forehead,
 And poised a golden rod.

RHYME a b c b

With mien to match the morning
 And gay delightful guise
And friendly brows and laughter
 He looked me in the eyes.

RHYME a b c b

Oh whence, I asked, and whither?
 He smiled and would not say,
And looked at me and beckoned
 And laughed and led the way.

RHYME a b c b

And with kind looks and laughter
 And nought to say beside
We two went on together,
 I and my happy guide.

RHYME a b c b

Across the glittering pastures
 And empty upland still
And solitude of shepherds
 High in the folded hill,

RHYME a b c b

By hanging woods and hamlets
 That gaze through orchards down
On many a windmill turning
 And far-discovered town,

RHYME a b c b

With gay regards of promise
 And sure unslackened stride
And smiles and nothing spoken
 Led on my merry guide.

RHYME a b c b

By blowing realms of woodland
 With sunstruck vanes afield
And cloud-led shadows sailing
 About the windy weald,

RHYME a b c b

By valley-guarded granges
 And silver waters wide,
Content at heart I followed
 With my delightful guide.

RHYME a b c b

And like the cloudy shadows
 Across the country blown
We two face on for ever,
 But not we two alone.

RHYME a b c b

With the great gale we journey
 That breathes from gardens thinned,
Borne in the drift of blossoms
 Whose petals throng the wind;

RHYME a b c b

Buoyed on the heaven-heard whisper
 Of dancing leaflets whirled
From all the woods that autumn
 Bereaves in all the world.

RHYME a b c b

And midst the fluttering legion
 Of all that ever died
I follow, and before us
 Goes the delightful guide,

RHYME a b c b

With lips that brim with laughter
 But never once respond,
And feet that fly on feathers,
 And serpent-circled wand.

TITLE When I meet the morning beam

RHYME a a b b

When I meet the morning beam,
Or lay me down at night to dream,
I hear my bones within me say,
"Another night, another day."

RHYME a a b b

"When shall this slough of sense be cast,
This dust of thoughts be laid at last,
The man of flesh and soul be slain
And the man of bone remain?"

RHYME a a b b

"This tongue that talks, these lungs that shout,
These thews that hustle us about,
This brain that fills the skull with schemes,
And its humming hive of dreams,-"

RHYME a a b b

"These to-day are proud in power
And lord it in their little hour:
The immortal bones obey control
Of dying flesh and dying soul."

RHYME a a b b

" 'Tis long till eve and morn are gone:
Slow the endless night comes on,
And late to fulness grows the birth
That shall last as long as earth."

RHYME a a b b

"Wanderers eastward, wanderers west,
Know you why you cannot rest?
'Tis that every mother's son
Travails with a skeleton."

RHYME a a b b

"Lie down in the bed of dust;
Bear the fruit that bear you must;
Bring the eternal seed to light,
And morn is all the same as night."

RHYME a a b b

"Rest you so from trouble sore,
Fear the heat o' the sun no more,
Nor the snowing winter wild,
Now you labour not with child."

RHYME a a b b

"Empty vessel, garment cast,
We that wore you long shall last.
-Another night, another day."
So my bones within me say.

RHYME a a b b

Therefore they shall do my will
To-day while I am master still,
And flesh and soul, now both are strong,
Shall hale the sullen slaves along,

RHYME a a b b

Before this fire of sense decay,
This smoke of thought blow clean away,
And leave with ancient night alone
The stedfast and enduring bone.

TITLE Shot? so quick, so clean an ending

RHYME a b a b

Shot? so quick, so clean an ending?
 Oh that was right, lad, that was brave:
Yours was not an ill for mending,
 'Twas best to take it to the grave.

RHYME a b a b

Oh you had forethought, you could reason,
 And saw your road and where it led,
And early wise and brave in season
 Put the pistol to your head.

RHYME a b a b

Oh soon, and better so than later
 After long disgrace and scorn,
You shot dead the household traitor,
 The soul that should not have been born.

RHYME a b a b

Right you guessed the rising morrow
 And scorned to tread the mire you must:
Dust's your wages, son of sorrow,
 But men may come to worse than dust.

RHYME a b a b

Souls undone, undoing others,-
 Long time since the tale began.
You would not live to wrong your brothers:
 Oh lad, you died as fits a man.

RHYME a b a b

Now to your grave shall friend and stranger
 With ruth and some with envy come:
Undishonoured, clear of danger,
 Clean of guilt, pass hence and home.

RHYME a b a b

Turn safe to rest, no dreams, no waking;
 And here, man, here's the wreath I've made:
'Tis not a gift that's worth the taking,
 But wear it and it will not fade.

TITLE If it chance your eye offend you

RHYME a b a b

If it chance your eye offend you,
 Pluck it out, lad, and be sound:
'Twill hurt, but here are salves to friend you,
 And many a balsam grows on ground.

RHYME a b a b

And if your hand or foot offend you,
 Cut it off, lad, and be whole;
But play the man, stand up and end you,
 When your sickness is your soul.

TITLE Bring, in this timeless grave to throw

RHYME a a *

 Bring, in this timeless grave to throw,
No cypress, sombre on the snow;
Snap not from the bitter yew
His leaves that live December through;
Break no rosemary, bright with rime
And sparkling to the cruel clime;
Nor plod the winter land to look
For willows in the icy brook
To cast them leafless round him: bring
No spray that ever buds in spring.

RHYME a a *

 But if the Christmas field has kept
Awns the last gleaner overstept,
Or shrivelled flax, whose flower is blue
A single season, never two;
Or if one haulm whose year is o'er
Shivers on the upland frore,
-Oh, bring from hill and stream and plain
Whatever will not flower again,
To give him comfort: he and those
Shall bide eternal bedfellows
Where low upon the couch he lies
Whence he never shall arise.

TITLE Here the hangman stops his cart

RHYME a a b b

"Here the hangman stops his cart:
Now the best of friends must part.
Fare you well, for ill fare I:
Live, lads, and I will die."

RHYME a a b b

"Oh, at home had I but stayed
'Prenticed to my father's trade,
Had I stuck to plane and adze,
I had not been lost, my lads."

RHYME a a b b

"Then I might have built perhaps
Gallows-trees for other chaps,
Never dangled on my own,
Had I but left ill alone."

RHYME a a b b

"Now, you see, they hang me high,
And the people passing by
Stop to shake their fists and curse;
So 'tis come from ill to worse."

RHYME a a b b

"Here hang I, and right and left
Two poor fellows hang for theft:
All the same's the luck we prove,
Though the midmost hangs for love."

RHYME a a b b

"Comrades all, that stand and gaze,
Walk henceforth in other ways;
See my neck and save your own:
Comrades all, leave ill alone."

RHYME a a b b

"Make some day a decent end,
Shrewder fellows than your friend.
Fare you well, for ill fare I:
Live, lads, and I will die."

TITLE Be still, my soul, be still

RHYME a b a b

Be still, my soul, be still; the arms you bear are brittle,
 Earth and high heaven are fixt of old and founded strong.
Think rather,-call to thought, if now you grieve a little,
 The days when we had rest, O soul, for they were long.

RHYME a b a b

Men loved unkindness then, but lightless in the quarry
 I slept and saw not; tears fell down, I did not mourn;
Sweat ran and blood sprang out and I was never sorry:
 Then it was well with me, in days ere I was born.

RHYME a b a b

Now, and I muse for why and never find the reason,
 I pace the earth, and drink the air, and feel the sun.
Be still, be still, my soul; it is but for a season:
 Let us endure an hour and see injustice done.

RHYME a b a b

Ay, look: high heaven and earth ail from the prime foundation;
 All thoughts to rive the heart are here, and all are vain:
Horror and scorn and hate and fear and indignation-
 Oh why did I awake? when shall I sleep again?

TITLE Think no more, lad; laugh, be jolly

RHYME a b c c a b

Think no more, lad; laugh, be jolly:
 Why should men make haste to die?
Empty heads and tongues a-talking
Make the rough road easy walking,
And the feather pate of folly
 Bears the falling sky.

RHYME a b c c a b

Oh, 'tis jesting, dancing, drinking
 Spins the heavy world around.
If young hearts were not so clever,
Oh, they would be young for ever:
Think no more; 'tis only thinking
 Lays lads underground.

TITLE In valleys of springs of rivers

RHYME a b a b

In valleys of springs of rivers,
 By Ony and Teme and Clun,
The country for easy livers,
 The quietest under the sun,

RHYME a b a b

We still had sorrows to lighten,
 One could not be always glad,
And lads knew trouble at Knighton
 When I was a Knighton lad.

RHYME a b a b

By bridges that Thames runs under,
 In London, the town built ill,
'Tis sure small matter for wonder
 If sorrow is with one still.

RHYME a b a b

And if as a lad grows older
 The troubles he bears are more,
He carries his griefs on a shoulder
 That handselled them long before.

RHYME a b a b

Where shall one halt to deliver
 This luggage I'd lief set down?
Not Thames, not Teme is the river,
 Nor London nor Knighton the town:

RHYME a b a b

'Tis a long way further than Knighton,
 A quieter place than Clun,
Where doomsday may thunder and lighten
 And little 'twill matter to one.

TITLE Loitering with a vacant eye

RHYME a a *

 Loitering with a vacant eye
Along the Grecian gallery,
And brooding on my heavy ill,
I met a statue standing still.
Still in marble stone stood he,
And stedfastly he looked at me.
"Well met," I thought the look would say,
"We both were fashioned far away;
We neither knew, when we were young,
These Londoners we live among."

RHYME a a *

 Still he stood and eyed me hard,
An earnest and a grave regard:
"What, lad, drooping with your lot?
I too would be where I am not.
I too survey that endless line
Of men whose thoughts are not as mine.
Years, ere you stood up from rest,
On my neck the collar prest;
Years, when you lay down your ill,
I shall stand and bear it still.
Courage, lad, 'tis not for long:
Stand, quit you like stone, be strong."
So I thought his look would say;
And light on me my trouble lay,
And I slept out in flesh and bone
Manful like the man of stone.

TITLE Far in a western brookland

RHYME a b c b

Far in a western brookland
 That bred me long ago
The poplars stand and tremble
 By pools I used to know.

RHYME a b c b

There, in the windless night-time,
 The wanderer, marvelling why,
Halts on the bridge to hearken
 How soft the poplars sigh.

RHYME a b c b

He hears: long since forgotten
 In fields where I was known,
Here I lie down in London
 And turn to rest alone.

RHYME a b c b

There, by the starlit fences,
 The wanderer halts and hears
My soul that lingers sighing
 About the glimmering weirs.

TITLE The lad came to the door at night

RHYME a b a b

The lad came to the door at night,
 When lovers crown their vows,
And whistled soft and out of sight
 In shadow of the boughs.

RHYME a b a b

"I shall not vex you with my face
 Henceforth, my love, for aye;
So take me in your arms a space
 Before the east is grey."

RHYME a b a b

"When I from hence away am past
 I shall not find a bride,
And you shall be the first and last
 I ever lay beside."

RHYME a b a b

She heard and went and knew not why;
 Her heart to his she laid;
Light was the air beneath the sky
 But dark under the shade.

RHYME a b a b

"Oh do you breathe, lad, that your breast
 Seems not to rise and fall,
And here upon my bosom prest
 There beats no heart at all?"

RHYME a b a b

"Oh loud, my girl, it once would knock,
 You should have felt it then;
But since for you I stopped the clock
 It never goes again."

RHYME a b a b

"Oh lad, what is it, lad, that drips
 Wet from your neck on mine?
What is it falling on my lips,
 My lad, that tastes of brine?"

RHYME a b a b

"Oh like enough 'tis blood, my dear,
 For when the knife has slit
The throat across from ear to ear
 'Twill bleed because of it."

RHYME a b a b

Under the stars the air was light
 But dark below the boughs,
The still air of the speechless night,
 When lovers crown their vows.

TITLE With rue my heart is laden

RHYME a b a b

With rue my heart is laden
 For golden friends I had,
For many a rose-lipt maiden
 And many a lightfoot lad.

RHYME a b a b

By brooks too broad for leaping
 The lightfoot boys are laid;
The rose-lipt girls are sleeping
 In fields where roses fade.

TITLE Westward on the high-hilled plains

RHYME a b a b

Westward on the high-hilled plains
 Where for me the world began,
Still, I think, in newer veins
 Frets the changeless blood of man.

RHYME a b a b

Now that other lads than I
 Strip to bathe on Severn shore,
They, no help, for all they try,
 Tread the mill I trod before.

RHYME a b a b

There, when hueless is the west
 And the darkness hushes wide,
Where the lad lies down to rest
 Stands the troubled dream beside.

RHYME a b a b

There, on thoughts that once were mine,
 Day looks down the eastern steep,
And the youth at morning shine
 Makes the vow he will not keep.

TITLE Far I hear the bugle blow

RHYME a a b b

"Far I hear the bugle blow
To call me where I would not go,
And the guns begin the song,
'Soldier, fly or stay for long.'"

RHYME a a b b

"Comrade, if to turn and fly
Made a soldier never die,
Fly I would, for who would not?
'Tis sure no pleasure to be shot."

RHYME a a b b

"But since the man that runs away
Lives to die another day,
And cowards' funerals, when they come
Are not wept so well at home."

RHYME a a b b

"Therefore, though the best is bad,
Stand and do the best my lad;
Stand and fight and see your slain,
And take the bullet in your brain."

TITLE You smile upon your friend to-day

RHYME a b a b

You smile upon your friend to-day,
 To-day his ills are over;
You hearken to the lover's say,
 And happy is the lover.

RHYME a b a b

'Tis late to hearken, late to smile,
 But better late than never:
I shall have lived a little while
 Before I die for ever.

TITLE When I came last to Ludlow

RHYME a b c b

When I came last to Ludlow
 Amidst the moonlight pale,
Two friends kept step beside me,
 Two honest lads and hale.

RHYME a b c b

Now Dick lies long in the churchyard,
 And Ned lies long in jail,
And I come home to Ludlow
 Amidst the moonlight pale.

TITLE The star-filled seas are smooth to-night

RHYME a b a b

The star-filled seas are smooth to-night
 From France to England strown;
Black towers above the Portland light
 The felon-quarried stone.

RHYME a b a b

On yonder island, not to rise,
 Never to stir forth free,
Far from his folk a dead lad lies
 That once was friends with me.

RHYME a b a b

Lie you easy, dream you light,
 And sleep you fast for aye;
And luckier may you find the night
 Than ever you found the day.

TITLE Now hollow fires burn out to black

RHYME a b a b

Now hollow fires burn out to black,
 And lights are guttering low:
Square your shoulders, lift your pack,
 And leave your friends and go.

RHYME a b a b

Oh never fear, man, nought's to dread,
 Look not left nor right:
In all the endless road you tread
 There's nothing but the night.

TITLE The vane on Hughley steeple

RHYME a b a b c d c d

The vane on Hughley steeple
 Veers bright, a far-known sign,
And there lie Hughley people,
 And there lie friends of mine.
Tall in their midst the tower
 Divides the shade and sun,
And the clock strikes the hour
 And tells the time to none.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

To south the headstones cluster,
 The sunny mounds lie thick;
The dead are more in muster
 At Hughley than the quick.
North, for a soon-told number,
 Chill graves the sexton delves,
And steeple-shadowed slumber
 The slayers of themselves.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

To north, to south, lie parted,
 With Hughley tower above,
The kind, the single-hearted,
 The lads I used to love.
And, south or north, 'tis only
 A choice of friends one knows,
And I shall ne'er be lonely
 Asleep with these or those.

TITLE Terence, this is stupid stuff

RHYME a a *

 "Terence, this is stupid stuff:
You eat your victuals fast enough;
There can't be much amiss, 'tis clear,
To see the rate you drink your beer.
But oh, good Lord, the verse you make,
It gives a chap the belly-ache.
The cow, the old cow, she is dead;
It sleeps well, the horned head:
We poor lads, 'tis our turn now
To hear such tunes as killed the cow.
Pretty friendship 'tis to rhyme
Your friends to death before their time
Moping melancholy mad:
Come, pipe a tune to dance to, lad."

RHYME a a *

 Why, if 'tis dancing you would be,
There's brisker pipes than poetry.
Say, for what were hop-yards meant,
Or why was Burton built on Trent?
Oh many a peer of England brews
Livelier liquor than the Muse,
And malt does more than Milton can
To justify God's ways to man.
Ale, man, ale's the stuff to drink
For fellows whom it hurts to think:
Look into the pewter pot
To see the world as the world's not.
And faith, 'tis pleasant till 'tis past:
The mischief is that 'twill not last.
Oh I have been to Ludlow fair
And left my necktie God knows where,
And carried half-way home, or near,
Pints and quarts of Ludlow beer:
Then the world seemed none so bad,
And I myself a sterling lad;
And down in lovely muck I've lain,
Happy till I woke again.
Then I saw the morning sky:
Heigho, the tale was all a lie;
The world, it was the old world yet,
I was I, my things were wet,
And nothing now remained to do
But begin the game anew.

 Therefore, since the world has still
Much good, but much less good than ill,
And while the sun and moon endure
Luck's a chance, but trouble's sure,
I'd face it as a wise man would,
And train for ill and not for good.
'Tis true the stuff I bring for sale
Is not so brisk a brew as ale:
Out of a stem that scored the hand
I wrung it in a weary land.
But take it: if the smack is sour,
The better for the embittered hour;
It should do good to heart and head
When your soul is in my soul's stead;
And I will friend you, if I may,
In the dark and cloudy day.

 There was a king reigned in the East:
There, when kings will sit to feast,
They get their fill before they think
With poisoned meat and poisoned drink.
He gathered all that springs to birth
From the many-venomed earth;
First a little, thence to more,
He sampled all her killing store;
And easy, smiling, seasoned sound,
Sate the king when healths went round.
They put arsenic in his meat
And stared aghast to watch him eat;
They poured strychnine in his cup
And shook to see him drink it up:
They shook, they stared as white's their shirt:
Them it was their poison hurt.
-I tell the tale that I heard told.
Mithridates, he died old.

TITLE I Hoed and trenched and weeded

RHYME a b a b

I Hoed and trenched and weeded,
 And took the flowers to fair:
I brought them home unheeded;
 The hue was not the wear.

RHYME a b a b

So up and down I sow them
 For lads like me to find,
When I shall lie below them,
 A dead man out of mind.

RHYME a b a b

Some seed the birds devour,
 And some the season mars,
But here and there will flower
 The solitary stars,

RHYME a b a b

And fields will yearly bear them
 As light-leaved spring comes on,
And luckless lads will wear them
 When I am dead and gone.

TITLE Prologue to Last Poems

RHYME a b c a c b b a a c d a

We'll to the woods no more,
     The laurels are all cut,
     The bowers are bare of bay
     That once the Muses wore;
     The year draws in the day
     And soon will evening shut:
     The laurels all are cut,
     We'll to the woods no more.
     Oh we'll no more, no more
     To the leafy woods away,
     To the high wild woods of laurel
     And the bowers of bay no more.

TITLE The West

RHYME a a b b

Beyond the moor and mountain crest
-- Comrade, look not on the west --
The sun is down and drinks away
From air and land the lees of day.

RHYME a a b b

The long cloud and the single pine
Sentinel the ending line,
And out beyond it, clear and wan
Reach the gulfs of evening on.

RHYME a a b b

The son of woman turns his brow
West from forty counties now,
And, as the edge of heaven he eyes,
Thinks eternal thoughts, and sighs.

RHYME a a b b

Oh wide's the world, to rest or roam,
With change abroad and cheer at home,
Fights and furloughs, talk and tale,
Company and beef and ale.

RHYME a a b b

But if I front the evening sky
Silent on the west look I,
And my comrade, stride for stride,
Paces silent at my side.

RHYME a a b b

Comrade, look not on the west:
'Twill have the heart out of your breast;
'Twill take your thoughts and sink them far,
Leagues beyond the western bar.

RHYME a a b b

Oh lad, I fear that yon's the sea
Where they fished for you and me,
And there, from whence we both were ta'en,
You and I shall drown again.

RHYME a a b b

Send not on your soul before
To dive from that beguiling shore,
And let not yet the swimmer leave
His clothes upon the sands of eve.

RHYME a a b b

Too fast to yonder strand forlorn
We journey, to the sunken bourn,
To flush the fading tinges eyed
By other lads at eventide.

RHYME a a b b

Wide is the world, to rest or roam,
And early 'tis for turning home:
Plant your heel on earth and stand,
And let's forget our native land.

RHYME a a b b

When you and I are spilt on air
Long we shall be strangers there;
Friends of flesh and bone are best:
Comrade, look not on the west.

TITLE Last Poems, II

RHYME a b c b

As I gird on for fighting
  My sword upon my thigh,
I think on old ill fortunes
  Of better men than I.
 
RHYME a b c b

Think I, the round world over,
  What golden lads are low
With hurts not mine to mourn for
  And shames I shall not know.
 
RHYME a b c b

What evil luck soever
  For me remains in store,
'Tis sure much finer fellows
  Have fared much worse before.
 
RHYME a b c b

So here are things to think on
  That ought to make me brave,
As I strap on for fighting
  My sword that will not save.

TITLE Last Poems, III

RHYME a b c b

Her strong enchantments failing,
  Her towers of fear in wreck,
Her limbecks dried of poisons
  And the knife at her neck,

RHYME a b c b

The Queen of air and darkness
  Begins to shrill and cry,
`O young man, O my slayer
  To-morrow you shall die.'

RHYME a b c b

O Queen of air and darkness
  I think 'tis truth you say,
And I shall die to-morrow;
  But you shall die to-day. 

TITLE Illic Jacet

RHYME a b a b

Oh hard is the bed they have made him,
  And common the blanket and cheap;
But there he will lie as they laid him:
  Where else could you trust him to sleep?
 
RHYME a b a b

To sleep when the bugle is crying
  And cravens have heard and are brave,
When mothers and sweethearts are sighing
  And lads are in love with the grave.
 
RHYME a b a b

Oh dark is the chamber and lonely,
  And lights and companions depart;
But lief will he lose them and only
  Behold the desire of his heart.
 
RHYME a b a b

And low is the roof, but it covers
  A sleeper content to repose;
And far from his friends and his lovers
  He lies with the sweetheart he chose.

TITLE The Grenadier

RHYME a b a b 

The Queen she sent to look for me,
  The sergeant he did say,
`Young man, a soldier will you be
  For thirteen pence a day?'
 
RHYME a b a b 

For thirteen pence a day did I
  Take off the things I wore,
And I have marched to where I lie,
  And I shall march no more.
 
RHYME a b a b 

My mouth is dry, my shirt is wet,
  My blood runs all away,
So now I shall not die in debt
  For thirteen pence a day.
 
RHYME a b a b 

To-morrow after new young men
  The sergeant he must see,
For things will all be over then
  Between the Queen and me.
 
RHYME a b a b 

And I shall have to bate my price,
  For in the grave, they say,
Is neither knowledge nor device
  Nor thirteen pence a day.

TITLE Lancer

RHYME a b a b

I 'listed at home for a lancer,
  Oh who would not sleep with the brave?
I 'listed at home for a lancer
  To ride on a horse to my grave.
 
RHYME a b a b

And over the seas we were bidden
  A country to take and to keep;
And far with the brave I have ridden,
  And now with the brave I shall sleep.
 
RHYME a b a b

For round me the men will be lying
  That learned me the way to behave,
And showed me my business of dying:
  Oh who would not sleep with the brave?
 
RHYME a a b

They ask, and there is not an answer;
Says I, I will 'list for a lancer,
  Oh who would not sleep with the brave?
 
RHYME a b a b

And I with the brave shall be sleeping
  At ease on my mattress of loam,
When back from their taking and keeping
  The squadron is riding at home.
 
RHYME a b a b

The wind with the plumes will be playing,
  The girls will stand watching them wave,
And eyeing my comrades and saying
  Oh who would not sleep with the brave?

RHYME a a b
 
They ask, and there is not an answer;
Says you, I will 'list for a lancer,
  Oh who would not sleep with the brave?

TITLE Last Poems, VII

RHYME a b a b

In valleys green and still
  Where lovers wander maying
They hear from over hill
  A music playing.

RHYME a b a b

Behind the drum and fife,
  Past hawthornwood and hollow,
Through earth and out of life
  The soldiers follow.

RHYME a b a b

The soldier's is the trade:
  In any wind or weather
He steals the heart of maid
  And man together.

RHYME a b a b

The lover and his lass
  Beneath the hawthorn lying
Have heard the soldiers pass,
  And both are sighing.

RHYME a b a b

And down the distance they
  With dying note and swelling
Walk the resounding way
  To the still dwelling.

TITLE Last Poems, VIII

RHYME a b a b

Soldier from the wars returning,
  Spoiler of the taken town,
Here is ease that asks not earning;
  Turn you in and sit you down.

RHYME a b a b

Peace is come and wars are over,
  Welcome you and welcome all,
While the charger crops the clover
  And his bridle hangs in stall.

RHYME a b a b

Now no more of winters biting
  Filth in trench from fall to spring,
Summers full of sweat and fighting
  For the Kesar or the King.

RHYME a b a b

Rest you, charger, rust you, bridle;
  Kings and Kesars, keep your pay;
Soldier, sit you down and idle
  At the inn of night for aye.

TITLE Last Poems, IX

RHYME a b a b

The chestnut casts his flambeaux, and the flowers
  Stream from the hawthorn on the wind away,
The doors clap to, the pane is blind with showers.
  Pass me the can, lad; there's an end of May.
 
RHYME a b a b

There's one spoilt spring to scant our mortal lot,
  One season ruined of our little store.
May will be fine next year as like as not:
  Oh ay, but then we shall be twenty-four.
 
RHYME a b a b

We for a certainty are not the first
  Have sat in taverns while the tempest hurled
Their hopeful plans to emptiness, and cursed
  Whatever brute and blackguard made the world.
 
RHYME a b a b

It is in truth iniquity on high
  To cheat our sentenced souls of aught they crave,
And mar the merriment as you and I
  Fare on our long fool's-errand to the grave.
 
RHYME a b a b

Iniquity it is; but pass the can.
  My lad, no pair of kings our mothers bore;
Our only portion is the estate of man:
  We want the moon, but we shall get no more.
 
RHYME a b a b

If here to-day the cloud of thunder lours
  To-morrow it will hie on far behests;
The flesh will grieve on other bones than ours
  Soon, and the soul will mourn in other breasts.
 
RHYME a b a b

The troubles of our proud and angry dust
  Are from eternity, and shall not fail.
Bear them we can, and if we can we must.
  Shoulder the sky, my lad, and drink your ale.

TITLE Last Poems, X

RHYME a b c b

Could man be drunk for ever
  With liquor, love, or fights,
Lief should I rouse at morning
  And lief lie down at nights.
 
RHYME a b c b

But men at whiles are sober
  And think by fits and starts,
And if they think, they fasten
  Their hands upon their hearts.

TITLE Last Poems, XI

RHYME a b a a b

Yonder see the morning blink:
  The sun is up, and up must I,
To wash and dress and eat and drink
And look at things and talk and think
  And work, and God knows why.
 
RHYME a b a a b

Oh often have I washed and dressed
  And what's to show for all my pain?
Let me lie abed and rest:
Ten thousand times I've done my best
  And all's to do again.

TITLE Last Poems, XII

RHYME a a *

  The laws of God, the laws of man,
He may keep that will and can;
Not I: let God and man decree
Laws for themselves and not for me;
And if my ways are not as theirs
Let them mind their own affairs.
Their deeds I judge and much condemn,
Yet when did I make laws for them?
Please yourselves, say I, and they
Need only look the other way.
But no, they will not; they must still
Wrest their neighbour to their will,
And make me dance as they desire
With jail and gallows and hell-fire.
And how am I to face the odds
Of man's bedevilment and God's?
I, a stranger and afraid
In a world I never made.
They will be master, right or wrong;
Though both are foolish, both are strong.
And since, my soul, we cannot fly
To Saturn nor to Mercury,
Keep we must, if keep we can,
These foreign laws of God and man.

TITLE The Deserter

RHYME a b a b

`What sound awakened me, I wonder,
  For now 'tis dumb.'
`Wheels on the road most like, or thunder:
  Lie down; 'twas not the drum.'
 
RHYME a b a b

Toil at sea and two in haven
  And trouble far;
Fly, crow, away, and follow, raven,
  And all that croaks for war.
 
RHYME a b a b

`Hark, I heard the bugle crying,
  And where am I?
My friends are up and dressed and dying,
  And I will dress and die.'
 
RHYME a b a b

`Oh love is rare and trouble plenty
  And carrion cheap,
And daylight dear at four-and-twenty:
  Lie down again and sleep.'
 
RHYME a b a b

`Reach me my belt and leave your prattle:
  Your hour is gone;
But my day is the day of battle,
  And that comes dawning on.
 
RHYME a b a b

`They mow the field of man in season:
  Farewell, my fair,
And, call it truth or call it treason,
  Farewell the vows that were.'
 
RHYME a b a b

`Ay, false heart, forsake me lightly:
  'Tis like the brave.
They find no bed to joy in rightly
  Before they find the grave.
 
RHYME a b a b

`Their love is for their own undoing,
  And east and west
They scour about the world a-wooing
  The bullet to their breast.
 
RHYME a b a b

`Sail away the ocean over,
  Oh sail away,
And lie there with your leaden lover
  For ever and a day.'

TITLE The Culprit

RHYME a b c b b

The night my father got me
  His mind was not on me;
He did not plague his fancy
  To muse if I should be
  The son you see.

RHYME a b c b b

The day my mother bore me
  She was a fool and glad,
For all the pain I cost her,
  That she had borne the lad
  That borne she had.

RHYME a b c b b

My mother and my father
  Out of the light they lie;
The warrant would not find them,
  And here 'tis only I
  Shall hang so high.

RHYME a b c b b

Oh let not man remember
  The soul that God forgot
But fetch the county kerchief
  And noose me in the knot
  And I will rot.

RHYME a b c b b

For so the game is ended
  That should not have begun.
My father and my mother
  They had a likely son,
  And I have none.

TITLE Eight O' Clock

RHYME a b a b

He stood, and heard the steeple
  Sprinkle the quarters on the morning town.
One, two, three, four, to market-place and people
  It tossed them down.
 
RHYME a b a b

Strapped, noosed, nighing his hour,
  He stood and counted them and cursed his luck;
And then the clock collected in the tower
  Its strength, and struck.

TITLE Spring Morning

RHYME a b a b

Star and coronal and bell
  April underfoot renews,
And the hope of man as well
  Flowers among the morning dews.

RHYME a b a b

Now the old come out to look,
  Winter past and winter's pains,
How the sky in pool and brook
  Glitters on the grassy plains.

RHYME a b a b

Easily the gentle air
  Wafts the turning season on;
Things to comfort them are there,
  Though 'tis true the best are gone.

RHYME a b a b

Now the scorned unlucky lad
  Rousing from his pillow gnawn
Mans his heart and deep and glad
  Drinks the valiant air of dawn.

RHYME a b a b

Half the night he longed to die,
  Now are sown on hill and plain
Pleasures worth his while to try
  Ere he longs to die again.

RHYME a b a b

Blue the sky from east to west
  Arches, and the world is wide,
Though the girl he loves the best
  Rouses from another's side.

TITLE Astronomy

RHYME a b a b

The Wain upon the northern steep
  Descends and lifts away.
Oh I will sit me down and weep
  For bones in Africa.
 
RHYME a b a b

For pay and medals, name and rank,
  Things that he has not found,
He hove the Cross to heaven and sank
  The pole-star underground.
 
RHYME a b a b

And now he does not even see
  Signs of the nadir roll
At night over the ground where he
  Is buried with the pole.

TITLE Last Poems, XVIII

RHYME a b c c b

The rain, it streams on stone and hillock,
  The boot clings to the clay.
Since all is done that's due and right
Let's home; and now, my lad, good-night,
  For I must turn away.
 
RHYME a b c c b

Good-night, my lad, for nought's eternal;
  No league of ours, for sure.
To-morrow I shall miss you less,
And ache of heart and heaviness
  Are things that time should cure.
 
RHYME a b c c b

Over the hill the highway marches
  And what's beyond is wide:
Oh soon enough will pine to nought
Remembrance and the faithful thought
  That sits the grave beside.
 
RHYME a b c c b

The skies, they are not always raining
  Nor grey the twelvemonth through;
And I shall meet good days and mirth,
And range the lovely lands of earth
  With friends no worse than you.
 
RHYME a b c c b

But oh, my man, the house is fallen
  That none can build again;
My man, how full of joy and woe
Your mother bore you years ago
  To-night to lie in the rain.

TITLE Last Poems, XIX

RHYME a b c b

In midnights of November,
  When Dead Man's Fair is nigh,
And danger in the valley,
  And anger in the sky,

RHYME a b c b

Around the huddling homesteads
  The leafless timber roars,
And the dead call the dying
  And finger at the doors.

RHYME a b c b

Oh, yonder faltering fingers
  Are hands I used to hold;
Their false companion drowses
  And leaves them in the cold.

RHYME a b c b

Oh, to the bed of ocean,
  To Africk and to Ind,
I will arise and follow
  Along the rainy wind.

RHYME a b c b

The night goes out and under
  With all its train forlorn;
Hues in the east assemble
  And cocks crow up the morn.

RHYME a b c b

The living are the living
  And dead the dead will stay,
And I will sort with comrades
  That face the beam of day.

TITLE Last Poems, XX

RHYME a b c a b c

The night is freezing fast,
  To-morrow comes December;
    And winterfalls of old
Are with me from the past;
  And chiefly I remember
    How Dick would hate the cold.
 
RHYME a b c a b c

Fall, winter, fall; for he,
  Prompt hand and headpiece clever,
    Has woven a winter robe,
And made of earth and sea
  His overcoat for ever,
    And wears the turning globe.

TITLE Last Poems, XXI

RHYME a b a b

The fairies break their dances
  And leave the printed lawn,
And up from India glances
  The silver sail of dawn.

RHYME a b a b

The candles burn their sockets,
  The blinds let through the day,
The young man feels his pockets
  And wonders what's to pay.

TITLE Lost Poems, XXII

RHYME a b a b

The sloe was lost in flower,
  The April elm was dim;
That was the lover's hour,
  The hour for lies and him.
 
RHYME a b a b

If thorns are all the bower,
  If north winds freeze the fir,
Why, 'tis another's hour,
  The hour for truth and her.

TITLE Lost Poems, XXII

RHYME a b c b

In the morning, in the morning,
  In the happy field of hay,
Oh they looked at one another
  By the light of day.

In the blue and silver morning
  On the haycock as they lay,
Oh they looked at one another
  And they looked away.

TITLE Epithalium

RHYME a a *

  He is here, Urania's son,
Hymen come from Helicon;
God that glads the lover's heart,
He is here to join and part.
So the groomsman quits your side
And the bridegroom seeks the bride:
Friend and comrade yield you o'er
To her that hardly loves you more.

RHYME a a *

  Now the sun his skyward beam
Has tilted from the Ocean stream.
Light the Indies, laggard sun:
Happy bridegroom, day is done,
And the star from $(C(+(Bta's steep
Calls to bed but not to sleep.

RHYME a a *

  Happy bridegroom, Hesper brings
All desired and timely things.
All whom morning sends to roam,
Hesper loves to lead them home.
Home return who him behold,
Child to mother, sheep to fold,
Bird to nest from wandering wide:
Happy bridegroom, seek your bride.

RHYME a a *

  Pour it out, the golden cup
Given and guarded, brimming up,
Safe through jostling markets borne
And the thicket of the thorn;
Folly spurned and danger past,
Pour it to the god at last.

RHYME a a *

  Now, to smother noise and light
Is stolen abroad the wildering night,
And the blotting shades confuse
Path and meadow full of dews;
And the high heavens, that all control,
Turn in silence round the pole.
Catch the starry beams they shed
Prospering the married bed,
And breed the land that reared your prime
Sons to stay the rot of time.
All is quiet, no alarms;
Nothing fear of nightly harms.
Safe you sleep on guarded ground,
And in silent circle round
The thoughts of friends keep watch and ward,
Harnessed angels, hand on sword.

TITLE The Oracles

RHYME a b a b

'Tis mute, the word they went to hear on high Dodona mountain
  When winds were in the oakenshaws and all the cauldrons tolled,
And mute's the midland navel-stone beside the singing fountain,
  And echoes list to silence now where gods told lies of old.
 
RHYME a b a b

I took my question to the shrine that has not ceased from speaking,
  The heart within, that tells the truth and tells it twice as plain;
And from the cave of oracles I heard the priestess shrieking
  That she and I should surely die and never live again.
 
RHYME a b a b

Oh priestess, what you cry is clear, and sound good sense I think it;
  But let the screaming echoes rest, and froth your mouth no more.
'Tis true there's better boose than brine, but he that drowns must drink it;
  And oh, my lass, the news is news that men have heard before.
 
RHYME a b a b

The King with half the East at heel is marched from lands of morning;
  Their fighters drink the rivers up, their shafts benight the air,
And he that stands will die for nought, and home there's no returning.
  The Spartans on the sea-wet rock sat down and combed their hair.

TITLE Last Poems, XXVI

RHYME a b a b

The half-moon westers low, my love,
  And the wind brings up the rain;
And wide apart lie we, my love,
  And seas between the twain.
 
RHYME a b a b

I know not if it rains, my love,
  In the land where you do lie;
And oh, so sound you sleep, my love,
  You know no more than I.

TITLE Last Poems, XXVII

RHYME a b a b

The sigh that heaves the grasses
  Whence thou wilt never rise
Is of the air that passes
  And knows not if it sighs.

RHYME a b a b

The diamond tears adorning
  Thy low mound on the lea,
Those are the tears of morning,
  That weeps, but not for thee.

TITLE Last Poems, XXVIII

RHYME a b a b

Now dreary dawns the eastern light,
  And fall of eve is drear,
And cold the poor man lies at night,
  And so goes out the year.
 
RHYME a b a b

Little is the luck I've had,
  And oh, 'tis comfort small
To think that many another lad
  Has had no luck at all.

TITLE Last Poems XXIX

RHYME a b c c a b d d

Wake not for the world-heard thunder
  Not the chime that earthquakes toll.
Star may plot in heaven with planet,
Lightning rive the rock of granite,
Tempest tread the oakwood under:
  Fear you not for flesh nor soul.
Marching, fighting, victory past,
Stretch your limbs in peace at last.
 
RHYME a b c c a b d d

Stir not for the soldiers drilling
  Nor the fever nothing cures:
Throb of drum and timbal's rattle
Call but man alive to battle,
And the fife with death-notes filling
  Screams for blood but not for yours.
Times enough you bled your best;
Sleep on now, and take your rest.
 
RHYME a b c c a b d d

Sleep, my lad; the French are landed,
  London's burning, Windsor's down;
Clasp your cloak of earth about you,
We must man the ditch without you,
March unled and fight short-handed,
  Charge to fall and swim to drown.
Duty, friendship, bravery o'er,
Sleep away, lad; wake no more.

TITLE Sinner's Rue

RHYME a b c b

I walked alone and thinking,
  And faint the night wind blew
And stirred on mounds at crossways
  The flower of sinner's rue.

RHYME a b c b

Where the roads part they bury
  Him that his own hand slays,
And so the weed of sorrow
  Springs at the four cross ways.

RHYME a b c b

By night I plucked it hueless,
  When morning broke 'twas blue:
Blue at my breast I fastened
  The flower of sinner's rue.

RHYME a b c b

It seemed a herb of healing,
  A balsam and a sign,
Flower of a heart whose trouble
  Must have been worse than mine.

RHYME a b c b

Dead clay that did me kindness,
  I can do none to you,
But only wear for breastknot
  The flower of sinner's rue.

TITLE Hell's Gate

RHYME a a *

  Onward led the road again
Through the sad uncoloured plain
Under twilight brooding dim,
And along the utmost rim
Wall and rampart risen to sight
Cast a shadow not of night,
And beyond them seemed to glow
Bonfires lighted long ago.
And my dark conductor broke
Silence at my side and spoke,
Saying, `You conjecture well:
Yonder is the gate of hell.'

RHYME a a *

  Ill as yet the eye could see
The eternal masonry,
But beneath it on the dark
To and fro there stirred a spark.
And again the sombre guide
Knew my question, and replied:
`At hell gate the damned in turn
Pace for sentinel and burn.'

RHYME a a *

  Dully at the leaden sky
Staring, and with idle eye
Measuring the listless plain,
I began to think again.
Many things I thought of then,
Battle, and the loves of men,
Cities entered, oceans crossed,
Knowledge gained and virtue lost,
Cureless folly done and said,
And the lovely way that led
To the slimepit and the mire
And the everlasting fire.
And against a smoulder dun
And a dawn without a sun
Did the nearing bastion loom,
And across the gate of gloom
Still one saw the sentry go,
Trim and burning, to and fro,
One for women to admire
In his finery of fire.
Something, as I watched him pace,
Minded me of time and place,
Soldiers of another corps
And a sentry known before.

RHYME a a *

  Ever darker hell on high
Reared its strength upon the sky,
And our footfall on the track
Fetched the daunting echo back.
But the soldier pacing still
The insuperable sill,
Nursing his tormented pride,
Turned his head to neither side,
Sunk into himself apart
And the hell-fire of his heart.
But against our entering in
From the drawbridge Death and Sun
Rose to render key and sword
To their father and their lord.
And the portress foul to see
Lifted up her eyes on me,
Smiling, and I made reply:
`Met again, my lass,' said I.
Then the sentry turned his head,
Looked, and knew me, and was Ned.

RHYME a a *

  Once he looked, and halted straight,
Set his back against the gate,
Caught his musket to his chin,
While the hive of hell within
Sent abroad a seething hum
As of towns whose king is come
Leading conquest home from far
And the captives of his war,
And the car of triumph waits,
And they open wide the gates.
But across the entry barred
Straddled the revolted guard,
Weaponed and accoutred well
From the arsenals of hell;
And beside him, sick and white,
Sin to left and Death to right
Turned a countenance of fear
On the flaming mutineer.
Over us the darkness bowed,
And the anger in the cloud
Clenched the lightning for the stroke;
But the traitor musket spoke.

RHYME a a *

  And the hollowness of hell
Sounded as its master fell,
And the mourning echo rolled
Ruin through his kingdom old.
Tyranny and terror flown
Left a pair of friends alone,
And beneath the nether sky
All that stirred was he and I.

RHYME a a *

  Silent, nothing found to say,
We began the backward way;
And the ebbing lustre died
From the soldier at my side,
As in all his spruce attire
Failed the everlasting fire.
Midmost of the homeward track
Once we listened and looked back;
But the city, dusk and mute,
Slept, and there was no pursuit.

TITLE Last Poems, XXXIII

RHYME a b c b d e f e

When I would muse in boyhood
  The wild green woods among,
And nurse resolves and fancies
  Because the world was young,
It was not foes to conquer,
  Nor sweethearts to be kind,
But it was friends to die for
  That I would seek and find.

RHYME a b c b d e f e

I sought them and I found them,
  The sure, the straight, the brave,
The hearts I lost my own to,
  The souls I could not save.
They braced their belts around them,
  They crossed in ships the sea,
They sought and found six feet of ground,
  And there they died for me.

TITLE Last Poems, XXXIV

RHYME a b a b

When the eye of day is shut,
  And the stars deny their beams,
And about the forest hut
  Blows the roaring wood of dreams,

RHYME a b a b

From deep clay, from desert rock,
  From the sunk sands of the main,
Come not at my door to knock,
  Hearts that loved me not again.

RHYME a b a b

Sleep, be still, turn to your rest
  In the lands where you are laid;
In far lodgings east and west
  Lie down on the beds you made.

RHYME a b a b

In gross marl, in blowing dust,
  In the drowned ooze of the sea,
Where you would not, lie you must,
  Lie you must, and not with me.

TITLE The First of May

RHYME a b a b c d c d

The orchards half the way
  From home to Ludlow fair
Flowered on the first of May
  In Mays when I was there;
And seen from stile or turning
  The plume of smoke would show
Where fires were burning
  That went out long ago.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

The plum broke forth in green,
  The pear stood high and snowed,
My friends and I between
  Would take the Ludlow road;
Dressed to the nines and drinking
  And light in heart and limb,
And each chap thinking
  The fair was held for him.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Between the trees in flower
  New friends at fairtime tread
The way where Ludlow tower
  Stands planted on the dead.
Our thoughts, a long while after,
  They think, our words they say;
Theirs now's the laughter,
  The fair, the first of May.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Ay, yonder lads are yet
  The fools that we were then;
For oh, the sons we get
  Are still the sons of men.
The sumless tale of sorrow
  Is all unrolled in vain:
May comes to-morrow
  And Ludlow fair again.

TITLE Last Poems, XXXV

RHYME a b a b

When first my way to fair I took
  Few pence in purse had I,
And long I used to stand and look
  At things I could not buy.

RHYME a b a b

Now times are altered: if I care
  To buy a thing, I can;
The pence are here and here's the fair,
  But where's the lost young man?

RHYME a b a b

-- To think that two and two are four
  And neither five nor three
The heart of man has long been sore
  And long 'tis like to be.

TITLE Revolution

RHYME a b a b

West and away the wheels of darkness roll,
  Day's beamy banner up the east is borne,
Spectres and fears, the nightmare and her foal,
  Drown in the golden deluge of the morn.
 
RHYME a b a b

But over sea and continent from sight
  Safe to the Indies has the earth conveyed
The vast and moon-eclipsing cone of night,
  Her towering foolscap of eternal shade.
 
RHYME a b a b

See, in mid heaven the sun is mounted; hark,
  The belfries tingle to the noonday chime.
'Tis silent, and the subterranean dark
  Has crossed the nadir, and begins to climb.

TITLE EPITAPH ON AN ARMY OF MERCENARIES

RHYME a b a b

These, in the day when heaven was falling,
  The hour when Earth's foundations fled,
Followed their mercenary calling
  And took their wages and are dead.
 
RHYME a b a b

Their shoulders held the sky suspended;
  They stood, and earth's foundations stay;
What God abandoned, these defended,
  And saved the sum of things for pay.

TITLE Last Poems, XXXVIII

RHYME a b c c b

Oh stay at home, my lad, and plough
  The land and not the sea,
And leave the soldiers at their drill,
And all about the idle hill
  Shepherd your sheep with me.

RHYME a b c c b

Oh stay with company and mirth
  And daylight and the air;
Too full already is the grave
Of fellows that were good and brave
  And died because they were.

TITLE Last Poems, XXXIX

RHYME a b c b b

When summer's end is nighing
  And skies at evening cloud,
I muse on change and fortune
  And all the feats I vowed
  When I was young and proud.

RHYME a b c b b

The weathercock at sunset
  Would lose the slanted ray,
And I would climb the beacon
  That looked to Wales away
  And saw the last of day.

RHYME a b c b b

From hill and cloud and heaven
  The hues of evening died;
Night welled through lane and hollow
  And hushed the countryside,
  But I had youth and pride.

RHYME a b c b b

And I with earth and nightfall
  In converse high would stand,
Late, till the west was ashen
  And darkness hard at hand,
  And the eye lost the land.

RHYME a b c b b

The year might age, and cloudy
  The lessening day might close,
But air of other summers
  Breathed from beyond the snows,
  And I had hope of those.

RHYME a b c b b

They came and were and are not
  And come no more anew;
And all the years and seasons
  That ever can ensue
  Must now be worse and few.

RHYME a b c b b

So here's an end of roaming
  On eves when autumn nighs:
The ear too fondly listens
  For summer's parting sighs,
  And then the heart replies.

TITLE Last Poems, XL

RHYME a b c b d b

Tell me not here, it needs not saying,
  What tune the enchantress plays
In aftermaths of soft September
  Or under blanching mays,
For she and I were long acquainted
  And I knew all her ways.
 
RHYME a b c b d b

On russet floors, by waters idle,
  The pine lets fall its cone;
The cuckoo shouts all day at nothing
  In leafy dells alone;
And traveller's joy beguiles in autumn
  Hearts that have lost their own.
 
RHYME a b c b d b

On acres of the seeded grasses
  The changing burnish heaves;
Or marshalled under moons of harvest
  Stand still all night the sheaves;
Or beeches strip in storms for winter
  And stain the wind with leaves.
 
RHYME a b c b d b

Possess, as I possessed a season,
  The countries I resign,
Where over elmy plains the highway
  Would mount the hills and shine,
And full of shade the pillared forest
  Would murmur and be mine.
 
RHYME a b c b d b

For nature, heartless, witless nature,
  Will neither care nor know
What stranger's feet may find the meadow
  And trespass there and go,
Nor ask amid the dews of morning
  If they are mine or no.

TITLE Fancy's Knell

RHYME a b a b c d c d

When lads were home from labour
  At Abdon under Clee,
A man would call his neighbour
  And both would send for me.
And where the light in lances
  Across the mead was laid,
There to the dances,
  I fetched my flute and played.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Ours were idle pleasures,
  Yet oh, content we were,
The young to wind the measures,
  The old to heed the air;
And I to lift with playing
  From tree and tower and steep
The light delaying,
  And flute the sun to sleep.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

The youth toward his fancy,
  Would turn his brow of tan,
And Tom would pair with Nancy
  And Dick step off with Fan;
The girl would lift her glances
  To his, and both be mute:
Well went the dances
  At evening to the flute.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Wenlock Edge was umbered,
  And bright was Abdon Burf,
And warm between them slumbered
  The smooth green miles of turf;
Until from grass and clover
  The upshot beam would fade,
And England over
  Advanced the lofty shade.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

The lofty shade advances,
  I fetch my flute and play:
Come, lads, and learn the dances
  And praise the tune to-day.
To-morrow, more's the pity,
  Away we both must hie,
To air the ditty,
  And to earth I.

TITLE Easter Hymn

RHYME a a *

If in that Syrian garden, ages slain,
You sleep, and know not you are dead in vain,
Nor even in dreams behold how dark and bright
Ascends in smoke and fire by day and night
The hate you died to quench and could but fan,
Sleep well and see no morning, son of man.
 
RHYME a a *

But if, the grave rent and the stone rolled by,
At the right hand of majesty on high
You sit, and sitting so remember yet
Your tears, your agony and bloody sweat,
Your cross and passion and the life you gave,
Bow hither out of heaven and see and save.

TITLE More Poems, II

RHYME a b a b

When Israel out of Egypt came
  Safe in the sea they trod;
By day in cloud, by night in flame,
  Went on before them God.
 
RHYME a b a b

He brought them with a stretched out hand
  Dry-footed through the foam,
Past sword and famine, rock and sand,
  Lust and rebellion, home.
 
RHYME a b a b

I never over Horeb heard
  The blast of advent blow;
No fire-faced prophet brought me word
  Which way behoved me go.
 
RHYME a b a b

Ascended is the cloudy flame,
  The mount of thunder dumb;
The tokens that to Israel came,
  To me they have not come.
 
RHYME a b a b

I see the country far away
  Where I shall never stand;
The heart goes where no footstep may
  Into the promised land.
 
RHYME a b a b

The realm I look upon and die
  Another man will own;
He shall attain the heaven that I
  Perish and have not known.
 
RHYME a b a b

But I will go where they are hid
  That never were begot,
To my inheritance amid
  The nation that is not.

TITLE More Poems, III

RHYME a b a b

For these of old the trader
  Unpearled the Indian seas,
The nations of the nadir
  Were diamondless for these;
 
RHYME a b a b

A people prone and haggard
  Beheld their lightnings hurled:
All round, like Sinai, staggered
  The sceptre-shaken world.
 
RHYME a b a b

But now their coins are tarnished,
  Their towers decayed away,
Their kingdom swept and garnished
  For haler kings than they;
 
RHYME a b a b

Their arms the rust hath eaten,
  Their statutes none regard:
Arabia shall not sweeten
  Their dust, with all her nard.
 
RHYME a b a b

They cease from long vexation,
  Their nights, their days are done,
The pale, the perished nation
  That never see the sun;
 
RHYME a b a b

From the old deep-dusted annals
  The years erase their tale,
And round them race the channels
  That take no second sail.

TITLE More Poems, IV

RHYME a b a b

O youth whose heart is right,
  Whose loins are girt to gain
The hell-defended height
  Where Virtue beckons plain;

RHYME a b a b

Who seest the stark array
  And hast not stayed to count
But singly wilt assay
  The many-cannoned mount:

RHYME a b a b

Well is thy war begun;
  Endure, be strong and strive;
But think not, O my son,
  To save thy soul alive.

RHYME a b a b

Wilt thou be true and just
  And clean and kind and brave?
Well; but for all thou dost,
  Be sure it shall not save.

RHYME a b a b

Thou, when the night falls deep,
  Thou, though the mount be won,
High heart, thou shalt but sleep
  The sleep denied to none.

RHYME a b a b

Others, or ever thou,
  To scale those heights were sworn;
And some achieved, but now
  They never see the morn.

RHYME a b a b

How shouldst thou keep the prize?
  Thou wast not born for aye.
Content thee if thine eyes
  Behold it in thy day.

RHYME a b a b

O youth that wilt attain,
  On, for thine hour is short.
It may be thou shalt gain
  The hell-defended fort.

TITLE More Poems, V

RHYME a b a b

The snows are fled away, leaves on the shaws
  And grasses in the mead renew their birth,
The river to the river-bed withdraws,
  And altered is the fashion of the earth.

RHYME a b a b

The Nymphs and Graces three put off their fear
  And unapparelled in the woodland play.
The swift hour and the brief prime of the year
  Say to the soul, Thou wast not born for aye.

RHYME a b a b

Thaw follows frost; hard on the heel of spring
  Treads summer sure to die, for hard on hers
Comes autumn, with his apples scattering;
  Then back to wintertide, when nothing stirs.

RHYME a b a b

But oh, whate'er the sky-led seasons mar,
  Moon upon moon rebuilds it with her beams:
Come we where Tullus and where Ancus are,
  And good Aeneas, we are dust and dreams.

RHYME a b a b

Torquatus, if the gods in heaven shall add
  The morrow to the day, what tongue has told?
Feast then thy heart, for what thy heart has had
  The fingers of no heir will ever hold.

RHYME a b a b

When thou descendest once the shades among,
  The stern assize and equal judgment o'er,
Not thy long lineage nor thy golden tongue,
  No, nor thy righteousness, shall friend thee more.

RHYME a b a b

Night holds Hippolytus the pure of stain,
  Diana steads him nothing, he must stay;
And Theseus leaves PirithoN|s in the chain
  The love of comrades cannot take away.

TITLE More Poems, VI

RHYME a b b c d e e c

I to my perils
  Of cheat and charmer
  Came clad in armour
    By stars benign.
Hope lies to mortals
  And most believe her
  But man's deceiver
    Was never mine.

RHYME a b b c d e e c

The thoughts of others
  Were light and fleeting,
  Of lovers' meeting
    Or luck or fame.
Mine were of trouble,
  And mine were steady,
  So I was ready
    When trouble came.

TITLE More Poems, VII

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Stars, I have seen them fall,
  But when they drop and die
No star is lost at all
  From all the star-sown sky.
The toil of all that be
  Helps not the primal fault;
It rains into the sea,
  And still the sea is salt.

TITLE More Poems, VIII

RHYME a b a b

Give me a land of boughs in leaf,
  A land of trees that stand;
Where trees are fallen, there is grief;
  I love no leafless land.

RHYME a b a b

Alas, the country whence I fare,
  It is where I would stay;
And where I would not, it is there
  That I shall be for aye.

RHYME a b a b

And one remembers and forgets
  But 'tis not found again,
Not though they hale in crimsoned nets
  The sunset from the main.

TITLE More Poems, IX

RHYME a b a b c d c d

When green buds hang in the elm like dust
  And sprinkle the lime like rain,
Forth I wander, forth I must,
  And drink of life again.
Forth I must by hedgerow bowers
  To look at the leaves uncurled,
And stand in the fields where cuckoo-flowers
  Are lying about the world.

TITLE More Poems, X

RHYME a b c b

The weeping Pleiads wester,
  And the moon is under sea;
From bourn to bourn of midnight
  Far sighs the rainy breeze:

RHYME a b c b

It sighs from a lost country
  To a land I have not known;
The weeping Pleiads wester,
  And I lie down alone.

TITLE More Poems, XI

RHYME a b c b

The rainy Pleiads wester,
  Orion plunges prone,
The stroke of midnight ceases,
  And I lie down alone.

RHYME a b c b

The rainy Pleiads wester
  And seek beyond the sea
The head that I shall dream of,
  And 'twill not dream of me.

TITLE More Poems, XII

RHYME a b a b

I promise nothing: friends will part;
  All things may end, for all began;
And truth and singleness of heart
  Are mortal even as is man.
 
RHYME a b a b

But this unlucky love should last
  When answered passions thin to air;
Eternal fate so deep has cast
  Its sure foundation of despair.

TITLE More Poems, XIII

RHYME a b c b

I lay me down and slumber
  And every morn revive.
Whose is the night-long breathing
  That keeps a man alive?

RHYME a b c b

When I was off to dreamland
  And left my limbs forgot,
Who stayed at home to mind them,
  And breathed when I did not?
          
RHYME a b c b

-- I waste my time in talking,
  No heed at all takes he,
My kind and foolish comrade
  That breathes all night for me.

TITLE More Poems, XIV

RHYME a b a b

The farms of home lie lost in even,
  I see far off the steeple stand;
West and away from here to heaven
  Still is the land.

RHYME a b a b

There if I go no girl will greet me,
  No comrade hollo from the hill,
No dog run down the yard to meet me:
  The land is still.

RHYME a b a b

The land is still by farm and steeple,
  And still for me the land may stay:
There I was friends with perished people,
  And there lie they.

TITLE More Poems, XV

RHYME a b a b

Tarry, delight, so seldom met,
  So sure to perish, tarry still;
Forbear to cease or languish yet,
  Though soon you must and will.

RHYME a b a b

By Sestos town, in Hero's tower,
  On Hero's heart Leander lies;
The signal torch has burned its hour
  And sputters as it dies.

RHYME a b a b

Beneath him, in the nighted firth,
  Between two continents complain
The seas he swam from earth to earth
  And he must swim again.

TITLE More Poems, XVI

RHYME a a b c c c b

How clear, how lovely bright,
How beautiful to sight
  Those beams of morning play;
How heaven laughs out with glee
Where, like a bird set free,
Up from the eastern sea
  Soars the delightful day.

RHYME a a b c c c b

To-day I shall be strong,
No more shall yield to wrong,
  Shall squander life no more;
Days lost, I know not how,
I shall retrieve them now;
Now I shall keep the vow
  I never kept before.

RHYME a a b c c c b

Ensanguining the skies
How heavily it dies
  Into the west away;
Past touch and sight and sound
Not further to be found,
How hopeless under ground
  Falls the remorseful day.

TITLE More Poems, XVII

RHYME a a b b

Bells in tower at evening toll,
And the day forsakes the soul;
Soon will evening's self be gone
And the whispering night come on.

RHYME a a b b

Blame not thou the blinded light
Nor the whisper of the night:
Though the whispering night were still,
Yet the heart would counsel ill.

TITLE More Poems, XVIII

RHYME a b a b c c b

Delight it is in youth and May
  To see the morn arise,
And more delight to look all day
  A lover in the eyes.
Oh maiden, let your distaff be,
And pace the flowery meads with me,
  And I will tell you lies.

RHYME a b a b c c b

'Tis blithe to see the sunshine fail,
  And hear the land grow still
And listen till the nightingale
  Is heard beneath the hill.
Oh follow me where she is flown
Into the leafy woods alone,
  And I will work you ill.

TITLE More Poems, XIX

RHYME a a b b

The mill-stream, now that noises cease,
Is all that does not hold its peace;
Under the bridge it murmurs by,
And here are night and hell and I.
 
RHYME a a b b

Who made the world I cannot tell;
'Tis made, and here I am in hell.
My hand, though now my knuckles bleed,
I never soiled with such a deed.
 
RHYME a a b b

And so, no doubt, in time gone by,
Some have suffered more than I,
Who only spend the night alone
And strike my fist upon the stone.

TITLE More Poems, XX

RHYME a b a b

Like mine, the veins of these that slumber
  Leapt once with dancing fires divine;
The blood of all this noteless number
  Ran red like mine.

RHYME a b a b

How still, with every pulse in station,
  Frost in the founts that used to leap,
The put to death, the perished nation,
  How sound they sleep!

RHYME a b a b

These too, these veins which life convulses,
  Wait but a while, shall cease to bound;
I with the ice in all my pulses
  Shall sleep as sound.

TITLE More Poems, XXI

RHYME a b c b

The world goes none the lamer
  For ought that I can see,
Because this cursed trouble
  Has struck my days and me.
 
RHYME a b c b

The stars of heaven are steady,
  The founded hills remain,
Though I to earth and darkness
  Return in blood and pain.
 
RHYME a b c b

Farewell to all belongings
  I won or bought or stole;
Farewell, my lusty carcase,
  Farewell, my aery soul.
 
RHYME a b c b

Oh worse remains for others
  And worse to fear had I
Than here at four-and-twenty
  To lay me down and die.

TITLE More Poems, XXII

RHYME a b c b

Ho, everyone that thirsteth
  And hath the price to give,
Come to the stolen waters,
  Drink and your soul shall live.
 
RHYME a b c b

Come to the stolen waters,
  And leap the guarded pale,
And pull the flower in season
  Before desire shall fail.
 
RHYME a b c b

It shall not last for ever,
  No more than earth and skies;
But he that drinks in season
  Shall live before he dies.
 
RHYME a b c b

June suns, you cannot store them
  To warm the winter's cold,
The lad that hopes for heaven
  Shall fill his mouth with mould.

TITLE More Poems, XXIII

RHYME a b c b

Crossing alone the nighted ferry
  With the one coin for fee,
Whom, on the wharf of Lethe waiting,
  Count you to find? Not me.
 
RHYME a b c b

The brisk fond lackey to fetch and carry,
  The true, sick-hearted slave,
Expect him not in the just city
  And free land of the grave.

TITLE More Poems, XXIV

RHYME a b a b

Stone, steel, dominions pass,
  Faith, too, no wonder;
So leave alone the grass
  That I am under.

RHYME a b a b

All knots that lovers tie
  Are tied to sever;
Here shall your sweetheart lie,
  Untrue for ever.

TITLE More Poems, XXV

RHYME a b a b

Yon flakes that fret the eastern sky
  Lead back my day of birth;
The far, wide-wandered hour when I
  Came crying upon earth.

RHYME a b a b

Then came I crying, and to-day,
  With heavier cause to plain,
Depart I into death away,
  Not to be born again.

TITLE More Poems, XXVI

RHYME a b a b

Good creatures, do you love your lives
  And have you ears for sense?
Here is a knife like other knives,
  That cost me eighteen pence.
 
RHYME a b a b

I need but stick it in my heart
  And down will come the sky,
And earth's foundations will depart
  And all you folk will die.

TITLE More Poems, XXVII

RHYME a a b a

To stand up straight and tread the turning mill,
To lie flat and known nothing and be still,
Are the two trades of man; and which is worse
I know not, but I know that both are ill.

TITLE More Poems, XXVIII

RHYME a b a b

He, standing hushed, a pace or two apart,
  Among the bluebells of the listless plain,
Thinks, and remembers how he cleansed his heart
  And washed his hands in innocence in vain.

TITLE More Poems, XXIX

RHYME a a b b

From the wash the laundress sends
My collars home with ravelled ends:
I must fit, now these are frayed,
My neck with new ones London-made.

RHYME a a b b

Homespun collars, homespun hearts,
Wear to rags in foreign parts.
Mine at least's as good as done,
And I must get a London one.

TITLE More Poems, XXX

RHYME a b c c b

Shake hands, we shall never be friends, all's over;
  I only vex you the more I try.
All's wrong that ever I've done or said,
And nought to help it in this dull head:
  Shake hands, here's luck, good-bye.
 
RHYME a b c c b

But if you come to a road where danger
  Or guilt or anguish or shame's to share,
Be good to the lad that loves you true
And the soul that was born to die for you,
  And whistle and I'll be there.

TITLE More Poems, XXXI

RHYME a b c b

Because I liked you better
  Than suits a man to say,
It irked you, and I promised
  To throw the thought away.
 
RHYME a b c b

To put the world between us
  We parted, stiff and dry;
`Good-bye,' said you, `forget me.'
  `I will, no fear', said I.
 
RHYME a b c b

If here, where clover whitens
  The dead man's knoll, you pass,
And no tall flower to meet you
  Starts in the trefoiled grass,
 
RHYME a b c b

Halt by the headstone naming
  The heart no longer stirred,
And say the lad that loved you
  Was one that kept his word.

TITLE More Poems, XXXII

RHYME a b a b b

With seed the sowers scatter
  The furrows as they go;
Poor lads, 'tis little matter
  How many sorts they sow,
  For only one will grow.

RHYME a b a b b

The charlock on the fallow
  Will take the traveller's eyes,
And gild the ploughland sallow
  With flowers before it dies.
  But twice 'twill not arise.

RHYME a b a b b

The stinging nettle only
  Will still be found to stand:
The numberless, the lonely,
  The thronger of the land,
  The leaf that hurts the hand.

RHYME a b a b b

It thrives, come sun, come showers,
  Blow east, blow west, it springs;
It peoples towns, and towers
  About the courts of Kings,
  And touch it and it stings.

TITLE More Poems, XXXIII

RHYME a b a b c d c d

On forelands high in heaven,
  'Tis many a year gone by,
Amidst the fall of even
  Would stand my friends and I.
Before our foolish faces
  Lay lands we did not see;
Our eyes were in the places
  Where we should never be.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

`Oh, the pearl seas are yonder,
  The amber-sanded short;
Shires where the girls are fonder,
  Towns where the pots hold more.
And here fret we and moulder
  By grange and rick and shed
And every moon are older,
  And soon we shall be dead.'

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Heigho, 'twas true and pity;
  But there we lads must stay.
Troy was a steepled city,
  But Troy was far away.
And round we turned lamenting
  To homes we longed to leave,
And silent hills indenting
  The orange band of eve.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

I see the air benighted
  And all the dusking dales,
And lamps in England lighted,
  And evening wrecked on Wales;
And starry darkness paces
  The road from sea to sea,
And blots the foolish faces
  Of my poor friends and me.

TITLE More Poems, XXXIV

RHYME a b c b b

Young is the blood that yonder
  Strides out the dusty mile,
And breasts the hillside highway
  And whistles loud the while,
  And vaults the stile.

RHYME a b c b b

Yet flesh, now too, has thorn-pricks,
  And shoulders carry care,
Even as in other seasons,
  When I and not my heir
  Was young and there.

RHYME a b c b b

On miry meads in winter
  The football sprang and fell;
May stuck the land with wickets:
  For all the eye could tell,
  The world went well.

RHYME a b c b b

Yet well, God knows, it went not,
  God knows, it went awry;
For me, one flowery Maytime,
  It went so ill that I
  Designed to die.

RHYME a b c b b

And if so long I carry
  The lot that season marred,
'Tis that the sons of Adam
  Are not so evil-starred
  As they are hard.

RHYME a b c b b

Young is the blood that yonder
  Succeeds to rick and fold,
Fresh are the form and favour
  And new the minted mould:
  The thoughts are old.

TITLE More Poems, XXXV

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Half-way, for one commandment broken,
  The woman made her endless halt,
And she to-day, a glistering token,
  Stands in the wilderness of salt.
Behind, the vats of judgment brewing
  Thundered, and thick the brimstone snowed;
He to the hill of his undoing
  Pursued his road.

TITLE More Poems, XXXVI

RHYME a b a b

Here dead lie we because we did not choose
  To live and shame the land from which we sprung.
Life, to be sure, is nothing much to lose;
  But young men think it is, and we were young.

TITLE More Poems, XXXVII

RHYME a b c b

I did not lose my heart in summer's even,
  When roses to the moonrise burst apart:
When plumes were under heel and lead was flying,
  In blood and smoke and flame I lost my heart.

RHYME a b c b

I lost it to a soldier and a foeman,
  A chap that did not kill me, but he tried;
That took the sabre straight, and took it striking
  And laughed and kissed his hand to me and died.

TITLE More Poems, XXXVIII

RHYME a b a b

By shores and woods and steeples
  Rejoicing hearts receive
Poured on a hundred peoples
  The far-shed alms of eve.

RHYME a b a b

Her hands are filled with slumber
  For world-wide labourers worn;
Yet those are more in number
  That know her not from morn.

RHYME a b a b

Now who sees night for ever,
  He sees no happier sight:
Night and no moon and never
  A star upon the night.

TITLE More Poems, XXXIX

RHYME a b a b

My dreams are of a field afar
  And blood and smoke and shot.
There in their graves my comrades are,
  In my grave I am not.

RHYME a b a b

I too was taught the trade of man
  And spelt the lesson plain;
But they, when I forgot and ran,
  Remembered and remain.

TITLE More Poems, XL

RHYME a b a b

Farewell to a name and a number
  Recalled again
To darkness and silence and slumber
  In blood and pain.
 
RHYME a b a b

So ceases and turns to the thing
  He was born to be
A soldier cheap to the King
  And dear to me;
 
RHYME a b a b

So smothers in blood the burning
  And flaming flight
Of valour and truth returning
  To dust and night.

TITLE More Poems, XLI

RHYME a b a b

He looked at me with eyes I thought
  I was not like to find,
The voice he begged for pence with brought
  Another man to mind.

RHYME a b a b

Oh no, lad, never touch your cap;
  It is not my half-crown:
You have it from a better chap
  That long ago lay down.

RHYME a b a b

Turn east and over Thames to Kent
  And come to the sea's brim,
And find his everlasting tent
  And touch your cap to him.

TITLE More Poems, XLII

RHYME a b a b

When he's returned I'll tell him -- oh,
  Dear fellow, I forgot:
Time was you would have cared to know,
  But now it matters not.

RHYME a b a b

I mourn you, and you heed not how;
  Unsaid the word must stay;
Last month was time enough, but now
  The news must keep for aye.

RHYME a b a b

Oh, many a month before I learn
  Will find me starting still
And listening, as the days return,
  For him that never will.

RHYME a b a b

Strange, strange to think his blood is cold
  And mine flows easy on:
And that straight look, that heart of gold,
  That grace, that manhood gone.

RHYME a b a b

The word unsaid will stay unsaid
  Though there was much to say;
Last month was time enough: he's dead,
  The news must keep for aye.

TITLE More Poems, XLIII

RHYME a b a b

I wake from dreams and turning
  My vision on the height
I scan the beacons burning
  About the fields of night.

RHYME a b a b

Each in its stedfast station
  Inflaming heaven they flare;
They sign with conflagration
  The empty moors of air.

RHYME a b a b

The signal-fires of warning
  They blaze, but none regard;
And on through night to morning
  The world runs ruinward.

TITLE More Poems, XLIV

RHYME a b a b c d c d

Far known to sea and shore,
  Foursquare and founded well,
A thousand years it bore,
  And then the belfry fell.
    The steersman of Triest
    Looked where his mark should be,
    But empty was the west
    And Venice under sea.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

From dusty wreck dispersed
  Its stature mounts amain;
On surer foot than first
  The belfry stands again.
    At to-fall of the day
    Again its curfew tolls
    And burdens far away
    The green and sanguine shoals.

RHYME a b a b c d c d

It looks to north and south,
  It looks to east and west;
It guides to Lido mouth
  The steersman of Triest.
    Andrea, fare you well;
    Venice, farewell to thee.
    The tower that stood and fell
    Is not rebuilt in me.

TITLE More Poems, XLV

RHYME a a b b

Smooth between sea and land
Is laid the yellow sand,
And here through summer days
The seed of Adam plays.

RHYME a a b b

Here the child comes to found
His unremaining mound,
And the grown lad to score
Two names upon the shore.

RHYME a a b b

Here, on the level sand,
Between the sea and land,
What shall I build or write
Against the fall of night?

RHYME a a b b

Tell me of runes to grave
That hold the bursting wave,
Or bastions to design
For longer date than mine.

RHYME a a b b

Shall it be Troy or Rome
I fence against the foam,
Or my own name, to stay
When I depart for aye?

RHYME a a b b c c

Nothing: too near at hand,
Planing the figure sand,
Effacing clean and fast
Cities not built to last
And charms devised in vain,
Pours the confounding main.

TITLE More Poems, XLVI

RHYME  a b c b

Hearken, landsmen, hearken, seamen,
  to the tale of grief and me,
Looking from the land of Biscay
  on the waters of the sea.

RHYME  a b c b d e f e g h i h

Looking from the land of Biscay
  over Ocean to the sky
On the far-beholding foreland
  paced at even grief and I.
There, as warm the west was burning
  and the east uncoloured cold,
Down the waterway of sunset
  drove to shore a ship of gold.
Gold of mast and gold of cordage,
  gold of sail to sight was she,
And she glassed her ensign golden
  in the waters of the sea.

RHYME  a b c b d e f e

Oh, said I, my friend and lover,
  take we now that ship and sail
Outward in the ebb of hues and
  steer upon the sunset trail;
Leave the night to fall behind us
  and the clouding counties leave:
Help for you and me is yonder,
  in a haven west of eve.

RHYME  a b c b d e f e g h i h

Under hill she neared the harbour
  till the gazer could behold
On the golden deck the steersman
  standing at the helm of gold,
Man and ship and sky and water
  burning in a single flame;
And the mariner of Ocean,
  he was calling as he came:
From the highway of the sunset
  he was shouting on the sea,
`Landsman of the land of Biscay,
  have you help for grief and me?'

RHYME  a b c b d e f e 

When I heard I did not answer,
  I stood mute and shook my heat:
Son of earth and son of Ocean,
  much we thought and nothing said.
Grief and I abode the nightfall,
  to the sunset grief and he
Turned them from the land of Biscay
  on the waters of the sea.

TITLE More Poems, XLVII

RHYME a b c b

O thou that from thy mansion
  Through time and place to roam,
Dost send abroad thy children,
  And then dost call them home,
 
RHYME a b c b

That men and tribes and nations
  And all thy hand hath made
May shelter them from sunshine
  In thine eternal shade:
 
RHYME a b c b

We now to peace and darkness
  And earth and thee restore
Thy creature that thou madest
  And wilt cast forth no more.

TITLE More Poems, XLVII

RHYME a a b c c b

Good-night; ensured release,
Imperishable peace,
  Have these for yours,
While sea abides, and land,
And earth's foundations stand,
  And heaven endures.

RHYME a a b c c b

When earth's foundations flee,
Nor sky nor land nor sea
  At all is found,
Content you, let them burn:
It is not your concern;
  Sleep on, sleep sound.

TITLE Additional Poems, I

RHYME a b a b

`Lydians, lords of Hermus river,
  Sifters of the golden loam,
See you yet the lances quiver
  And the hunt returning home?'

RHYME a b a b

`King, the star that shuts the even
  Calls the sheep from Tmolus down;
Home return the doves from heaving,
  And the prince to Sardis town.'

RHYME a b a b

From the hunting heavy laden
  Up the Mysian road they ride;
And the star that mates the maiden
  Leads his son to Croesus' side.

RHYME a b a b

`Lydians, under stream and fountain
  Finders of the golden vein,
Riding from Olympus mountain,
  Lydians, see you Atys plain?'

RHYME a b a b

`King, I see the Phrygian stranger
  And the guards in hunter's trim,
Saviours of thy son from danger;
  Them I see. I see not him.'

RHYME a b a b

`Lydians, as the troop advances,
  -- It is eve and I am old --
Tell me why they trail their lances,
  Washers of the sands of gold.

RHYME a b a b

`I am old and day is ending
  And the wildering night comes on;
Up the Mysian entry wending,
  Lydians, Lydians, what is yon?'

RHYME a b a b

Hounds behind their master whining,
  Huntsmen pacing dumb beside,
On his breast the boar-spear shining,
  Home they bear his father's pride.

TITLE Additional Poems, II

RHYME a b a b

Oh were he and I together,
  Shipmates on the fleeted main,
Sailing through the summer weather
  To the spoil of France or Spain.

RHYME a b a b

Oh were he and I together,
  Locking hands and taking leave,
Low upon the trampled heather
  In the battle lost at eve.

RHYME a b a b

Now are he and I asunder
  And asunder to remain;
Kingdoms are for others' plunder,
  And content for other slain.

TITLE Additional Poems, III

RHYME a b a b

When Adam walked in Eden young,
  Happy, 'tis writ, was he,
While high the fruit of knowledge hung
  Unbitten on the tree.
 
RHYME a b a b

Happy was he the livelong day;
  I doubt 'tis written wrong:
The heart of man, for all they say,
  Was never happy long.
 
RHYME a b a b

And now my feet are tired of rest,
  And here they will not stay,
And the soul fevers in my breast
  And aches to be away.

TITLE Additional Poems, IV

RHYME a b a b

It is no gift I tender,
  A loan is all I can;
But do not scorn the lender;
  Man gets no more from man.
 
RHYME a b a b

Oh, mortal man may borrow
  What mortal man can lend;
And 'twill not end to-morrow,
  Though sure enough 'twill end.
 
RHYME a b a b

If death and time are stronger,
  A love may yet be strong;
The world will last for longer,
  But this will last for long.

TITLE Additional Poems, V

RHYME a b a b

Here are the skies, the planets seven,
And all the starry train:
Content you with the mimic heaven,
And on the earth remain.

TITLE Additional Poems, VI

RHYME a a b a

Ask me no more, for fear I should reply;
  Others have held their tongues, and so can I;
Hundreds have died, and told no tale before:
  Ask me no more, for fear I should reply --

RHYME a b a b

How one was true and one was clean of stain
  And one was braver than the heavens are high,
And one was fond of me: and all are slain.
  Ask me no more, for fear I should reply.

TITLE Additional Poems, VII

RHYME a b a b

He would not stay for me, and who can wonder?
  He would not stay for me to stand and gaze.
I shook his hand, and tore my heart in sunder,
  And went with half my life about my ways.

TITLE Additional Poems, VIII

RHYME a b a b

Now to her lap the incestuous earth
  The son she bore has ta'en.
And other sons she brings to birth
  But not my friend again.

TITLE Additional Poems, IX

RHYME a b a b

When the bells justle in the tower
  The hollow night amid,
Then on my tongue the taste is sour
  Of all I ever did.

TITLE Additional Poems, X

RHYME a b a b

Oh on my breast in days hereafter
  Light the earth should lie,
Such weight to bear is now the air,
  So heavy hangs the sky.

TITLE Additional Poems, XI

RHYME a a *

Morning up the eastern stair
Marches, azuring the air,
And the foot of twilight still
Is stolen toward the western sill.
Blithe the maids go milking, blithe
Men in hayfields stone the scythe;
All the land's alive around
Except the churchyard's idle ground.
There's empty acres west and east,
But aye 'tis God's that bears the least:
This hopeless garden that they sow
With the seeds that never grow

TITLE Additional Poems, XIA

RHYME a a *

They shall have breath that never were,
But he that was shall have it ne'er;
The unconceived and unbegot
Shall look on heaven, but he shall not.
The heart with many wildfires lit,
Ice is not so cold as it.
The thirst that rivers could not lay
A little dust has quenched for aye;
And in a fathom's compass lie
Thoughts much wider than the sky.

TITLE Additional Poems, XII

RHYME a a *

Stay, if you list, O passer by the way;
Yet night approaches; better not to stay.
  I never sigh, nor flush, nor knit the brow,
  Nor grieve to think how ill God made me, now.
Here, with one balm for many fevers found,
Whole of an ancient evil, I sleep sound.

TITLE Additional Poems, XIII

RHYME a b a b b

Oh turn not in from marching
  To taverns on the way.
The drought and thirst and parching
  A little dust will lay,
  And take desire away.

RHYME a b a b b

Oh waste no words a-wooing
  The soft sleep to your bed;
She is not worth pursuing,
  You will so soon be dead;
  And death will serve instead.

TITLE Additional Poems, XIV

RHYME a b a b

`Oh is it the jar of nations,
  The noise of a world run mad,
The fleeing of earth's foundations?'
  Yes, yes: lie quiet, my lad,

RHYME a b a b

`Oh is it my country calling,
  And whom will my country find
To shore up the sky from falling?'
  My business: never you mind.

RHYME a b a b

`Oh is it the newsboys crying
  Lost battle, retreat, despair,
And honour and England dying?'
  Well, fighting-cock, what if it were?

RHYME a b a b

The devil this side of the darnels
  Is having a dance with man,
And quarrelsome chaps in charnels
  Must bear it as best they can.

TITLE Additional Poems, XV

RHYME a a b b

'Tis five years since, `An end,' said I;
`I'll march no further, time to die.
All's lost; no worse has heaven to give.'
Worse has it given, and yet I live.
 
RHYME a a b b

I shall not die to-day, no fear:
I shall live yet for many a year,
And see worse ills and worse again,
And die of age and not of pain.
 
RHYME a a b b

When God would rear from earth aloof
The blue height of the hollow roof,
He sought him pillars sure and strong,
And ere he found them sought them long.
 
RHYME a a b b

The stark steel splintered from the thrust,
The basalt mountain sprang to dust,
The blazing pier of diamond flawed
In shards of rainbow all abroad.
 
RHYME a a b b

What found he, that the heavens stand fast?
What pillar proven firm at last
Bears up so light that world-seen span?
The heart of man, the heart of man.

TITLE Additional Poems, XVI

RHYME a a b b

Some can gaze and not be sick,
But I could never learn the trick.
There's this to say for blood and breath,
They give a man a taste for death.

TITLE Additional Poems, XVII

RHYME a a b b

The stars have not dealt me the worst they could do:
My pleasures are plenty, my troubles are two.
But oh, my two troubles they reave me of rest,
The brains in my head and the heart in my breast.
 
RHYME a a b b

Oh grant me the ease that is granted so free,
The birthright of multitudes, give it to me,
That relish their victuals and rest on their bed
With flint in the bosom and guts in the head.

TITLE Additional Poems, XVIII

RHYME a a b b

Oh who is that young sinner with the handcuffs on his wrists?
And what has he been after that they groan and shake their fists?
And wherefore is he wearing such a conscience-stricken air?
Oh they're taking him to prison for the colour of his hair.
 
RHYME a a b b

'Tis a shame to human nature, such a head of hair as his;
In the good old time 'twas hanging for the colour that it is;
Though hanging isn't bad enough and flaying would be fair
For the nameless and abominable colour of his hair.
 
RHYME a a b b

Oh a deal of pains he's taken and a pretty price he's paid
To hide his poll or dye it of a mentionable shade;
But they've pulled the beggar's hat off for the world to see and stare,
And they're haling him to justice for the colour of his hair.
 
RHYME a a b b

Now 'tis oakum for his fingers and the treadmill for his feet
And the quarry-gang on Portland in the cold and in the heat,
And between his spells of labour in the time he has to spare
He can curse the God that made him for the colour of his hair.

TITLE Additional Poems, XIX

RHYME a a b b

In battles of no renown
My fellows and I fell down,
And over the dead men roar
The battles they lost before.

RHYME a a b b

The thunderstruck flagstaffs fall,
The earthquake breaches the wall,
The far-felled steeples resound,
And we lie under the ground.

RHYME a a b b

Oh, soldiers, saluted afar
By them that had seen your star,
In conquest and freedom and pride
Remember your friends that died.

RHYME a a b b

Amid rejoicing and song
Remember, my lads, how long,
How deep the innocent trod
The grapes of the anger of God.

TITLE Additional Poems, XX

RHYME a b a b b a b a

I shall not die for you,
  Another fellow may;
Good lads are left and true
  Though one departs away.
  But he departs to-day
And leaves his work to do,
  For I was luckless aye,
And shall not die for you.

TITLE Additional Poems, XXI

RHYME a b a b

The end of the year fell chilly
  Between a moon and a moon;
Through the twilight shrilly
  The bells rang, ringing no tune.

RHYME a b a b

The windows stained with story,
  The walls with miracle scored,
Were hidden for gloom and glory
  Filling the house of the Lord.

RHYME a b a b

Arch and aisle and rafter
  And roof-tree dizzily high
Were full of weeping and laughter
  And song and saying good-bye.

RHYME a b a b

There stood in the holy places
  A multitude none could name,
Ranks of dreadful faces
  Flaming, transfigured in flame.

RHYME a b a b

Crown and tiar and mitre
  Were starry with gold and gem;
Christmas never was whiter
  Than fear on the face of them.

RHYME a b a b

In aisles that emperors vaulted
  For a faith the world confessed,
Abasing the Host exalted,
  They worshipped towards the west.

RHYME a b a b

They brought with laughter oblation;
  They prayed, not bowing the head;
They made without tear lamentation,
  And rendered me answer and said:

RHYME a b a b

`O thou that seest our sorrow,
  It fares with us even thus:
To-day we are gods, to-morrow
  Hell have mercy on us.

RHYME a b a b

`Lo, morning over our border
  From out of the west comes cold;
Down ruins the ancient order
  And empire builded of old.

RHYME a b a b

`Our house at even is queenly
  With psalm and censers alight:
Look thou never so keenly
  Thou shalt not find us to-night.

RHYME a b a b

`We are come to the end appointed
  With sands not many to run;
Divinities disanointed
  And kings whose kingdom is done.

RHYME a b a b

`The peoples knelt down at our portal,
  All kindreds under the sky;
We were gods and implored and immortal
  Once; and to-day we die.'

RHYME a b a b

They turned them again to their praying,
  They worshipped and took no rest,
Singing old tunes and saying
  `We have seen his star in the west,'

RHYME a b a b

Old tunes of the sacred psalters,
  Set to wild farewells;
And I left them there at their altars
  Ringing their own dead knells.

TITLE Additional Poems, XXII

RHYME a b a b

Home is the sailor, home from sea:
  Her far-borne canvas furled
The ship pours shining on the quay
  The plunder of the world.
 
RHYME a b a b

Home is the hunter from the hill:
  Fast in the boundless snare
All flesh lies taken at his will
  And every fowl of air.
 
RHYME a b a b

'Tis evening on the moorland free,
  The starlit wave is still:
Home is the sailor from the sea,
  The hunter from the hill.

TITLE Additional Poems, XXIII

RHYME a b c b

The olive in its orchard
  Should now be rooted sure,
To cast abroad its branches
  And flourish and endure.

RHYME a b c b

Aloft amid the trenches
  Its dressers dug and died
The olive in its orchard
  Should prosper and abide.

RHYME a b c b

Close should the fruit be clustered
  And light the leaf should wave,
So deep the root is planted
  In the corrupting grave.

RHYME a b a b c d e d e c e e f f g g

Truth is eternal, and the Son of Heaven,
    Bright effluence of th'immortal ray,
Chief cherub, and chief lamp, of that high sacred Seven,
Which guard the throne by night, and are its light by day;
First of God's darling attributes,
    Thou daily seest him face to face,
Nor does thy essence fix'd depend on giddy circumstance
    Of time or place,
Two foolish guides in every sublunary dance;
  How shall we find Thee then in dark disputes?
  How shall we search Thee in a battle gain'd,
  Or a weak argument by force maintain'd?
In dagger contests, and th'artillery of words,
(For swords are madmen's tongues, and tongues are madmen's swords,)
    Contrived to tire all patience out,
    And not to satisfy the doubt?

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  But where is even thy Image on our earth?
    For of the person much I fear,
Since Heaven will claim its residence, as well as birth,
And God himself has said, He shall not find it here.
For this inferior world is but Heaven's dusky shade,
By dark reverted rays from its reflection made;
  Whence the weak shapes wild and imperfect pass,
  Like sunbeams shot at too far distance from a glass;
 
RHYME a a b c b c 

      Which all the mimic forms express,
Though in strange uncouth postures, and uncomely dress;
    So when Cartesian artists try
  To solve appearances of sight
    In its reception to the eye,
And catch the living landscape through a scanty light,

RHYME a a * 

   The figures all inverted show,
    And colours of a faded hue;
  Here a pale shape with upward footstep treads,
    And men seem walking on their heads;
    There whole herds suspended lie,
  Ready to tumble down into the sky;
  Such are the ways ill-guided mortals go
  To judge of things above by things below.
Disjointing shapes as in the fairy land of dreams,
  Or images that sink in streams;
  No wonder, then, we talk amiss
  Of truth, and what, or where it is;
  Say, Muse, for thou, if any, know'st,
Since the bright essence fled, where haunts the reverend ghost?

RHYME a a b a b c b d d c e f f e

If all that our weak knowledge titles virtue, be
(High Truth) the best resemblance of exalted Thee,
    If a mind fix'd to combat fate
With those two powerful swords, submission and humility,
    Sounds truly good, or truly great;
Ill may I live, if the good Sancroft, in his holy rest,
    In the divinity of retreat,
  Be not the brightest pattern earth can show
    Of heaven-born Truth below;
  But foolish man still judges what is best
    In his own balance, false and light,
    Following opinion, dark and blind,
    That vagrant leader of the mind,
Till honesty and conscience are clear out of sight.

RHYME a a b c c b d d e e f f g g 

And some, to be large ciphers in a state,
Pleased with an empty swelling to be counted great,
Make their minds travel o'er infinity of space,
  Rapt through the wide expanse of thought,
  And oft in contradiction's vortex caught,
To keep that worthless clod, the body, in one place;
Errors like this did old astronomers misguide,
Led blindly on by gross philosophy and pride,
    Who, like hard masters, taught the sun
    Through many a heedless sphere to run,
Many an eccentric and unthrifty motion make,
  And thousand incoherent journeys take,
    Whilst all th'advantage by it got,
    Was but to light earth's inconsiderable spot.

RHYME a b b a c c d d e e 

The herd beneath, who see the weathercock of state
  Hung loosely on the church's pinnacle,
Believe it firm, because perhaps the day is mild and still;
But when they find it turn with the first blast of fate,
By gazing upward giddy grow,
    And think the church itself does so;
  Thus fools, for being strong and num'rous known,
  Suppose the truth, like all the world, their own;
And holy Sancroft's motion quite irregular appears,
    Because 'tis opposite to theirs.

RHYME a a a b c c b d d e f f e 

In vain then would the Muse the multitude advise,
  Whose peevish knowledge thus perversely lies
    In gath'ring follies from the wise;
  Rather put on thy anger and thy spite,
    And some kind power for once dispense
  Through the dark mass, the dawn of so much sense,
To make them understand, and feel me when I write;
  The muse and I no more revenge desire,
Each line shall stab, shall blast, like daggers and like fire;
  Ah, Britain, land of angels! which of all thy sins,
    (Say, hapless isle, although
    It is a bloody list we know,)
Has given thee up a dwelling-place to fiends?

RHYME a a b b b c c d d e e  

   Sin and the plague ever abound
In governments too easy, and too fruitful ground;
     Evils which a too gentle king,
     Too flourishing a spring,
     And too warm summers bring:
   Our British soil is over rank, and breeds
   Among the noblest flowers a thousand pois'nous weeds,
   And every stinking weed so lofty grows,
   As if 'twould overshade the Royal Rose;
   The Royal Rose, the glory of our morn,
      But, ah! too much without a thorn.

RHYME a b c a c b b b 

Forgive (original mildness) this ill-govern'd zeal,
'Tis all the angry slighted Muse can do
     In the pollution of these days;
  No province now is left her but to rail,
  And poetry has lost the art to praise,
     Alas, the occasions are so few:
     None e'er but you,
     And your Almighty Master, knew
 
RHYME a a b b c c 

 With heavenly peace of mind to bear
(Free from our tyrant passions, anger, scorn, or fear)
The giddy turns of popular rage,
And all the contradictions of a poison'd age;
  The Son of God pronounced by the same breath
    Which straight pronounced his death;

RHYME a b c a d b c e d e f g f g 

  And though I should but ill be understood,		
  In wholly equalling our sin and theirs,		
  And measuring by the scanty thread of wit		
  What we call holy, and great, and just, and good,	
(Methods in talk whereof our pride and ignorance make use,)
  And which our wild ambition foolishly compares	
    With endless and with infinite;			
  Yet pardon, native Albion, when I say,		
Among thy stubborn sons there haunts that spirit of the Jews,
  That those forsaken wretches who to-day		
    Revile his great ambassador,			
  Seem to discover what they would have done		
  (Were his humanity on earth once more)		
To his undoubted Master, Heaven's Almighty Son.		

RHYME a a b b c d d c e e e e f f g g h h h 

But zeal is weak and ignorant, though wondrous proud,
  Though very turbulent and very loud;
    The crazy composition shows,
Like that fantastic medley in the idol's toes,
  Made up of iron mixt with clay,
  This crumbles into dust,
  That moulders into rust,
  Or melts by the first shower away.
Nothing is fix'd that mortals see or know,
Unless, perhaps, some stars above be so;
    And those, alas, do show,
  Like all transcendent excellence below;
    In both, false mediums cheat our sight,
And far exalted objects lessen by their height:
    Thus primitive Sancroft moves too high
    To be observed by vulgar eye,
    And rolls the silent year
    On his own secret regular sphere,
And sheds, though all unseen, his sacred influence here.

RHYME a a b b c c c d d e f g g f

Necessity, thou tyrant conscience of the great,
Say, why the church is still led blindfold by the state;
  Why should the first be ruin'd and laid waste,
  To mend dilapidations in the last?
And yet the world, whose eyes are on our mighty Prince,
    Thinks Heaven has cancell'd all our sins,
And that his subjects share his happy influence;
Follow the model close, for so I'm sure they should,
But wicked kings draw more examples than the good:
  And divine Sancroft, weary with the weight
Of a declining church, by faction, her worst foe, oppress'd,
    Finding the mitre almost grown
    A load as heavy as the crown,
  Wisely retreated to his heavenly rest.

RHYME a b a c d d c b e e e f f g h h g i i j j

Ah! may no unkind earthquake of the state,
    Nor hurricano from the crown,
Disturb the present mitre, as that fearful storm of late,
  Which, in its dusky march along the plain,
    Swept up whole churches as it list,
    Wrapp'd in a whirlwind and a mist;
Like that prophetic tempest in the virgin reign,
  And swallow'd them at last, or flung them down.
  Such were the storms good Sancroft long has borne;
  The mitre, which his sacred head has worn,
Was, like his Master's Crown, inwreath'd with thorn.
Death's sting is swallow'd up in victory at last,
    The bitter cup is from him past:
    Fortune in both extremes
  Though blasts from contrariety of winds,
    Yet to firm heavenly minds,
Is but one thing under two different names;
And even the sharpest eye that has the prospect seen,
  Confesses ignorance to judge between;
And must to human reasoning opposite conclude,
To point out which is moderation, which is fortitude.

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e f f g g h h i i i j k k k l l m m n n 

Thus Sancroft, in the exaltation of retreat,
  Shows lustre that was shaded in his seat;
    Short glimm'rings of the prelate glorified;
Which the disguise of greatness only served to hide.
    Why should the Sun, alas! be proud
    To lodge behind a golden cloud?
Though fringed with evening gold the cloud appears so gay,
'Tis but a low-born vapour kindled by a ray:
    At length 'tis overblown and past,
    Puff'd by the people's spiteful blast,
The dazzling glory dims their prostituted sight,
  No deflower'd eye can face the naked light:
  Yet does this high perfection well proceed
    From strength of its own native seed,
This wilderness, the world, like that poetic wood of old,
    Bears one, and but one branch of gold,
  Where the bless'd spirit lodges like the dove,
And which (to heavenly soil transplanted) will improve,
To be, as 'twas below, the brightest plant above;
  For, whate'er theologic levellers dream,
    There are degrees above, I know,
    As well as here below,
  (The goddess Muse herself has told me so),
  Where high patrician souls, dress'd heavenly gay,
  Sit clad in lawn of purer woven day.
There some high-spirited throne to Sancroft shall be given,
    In the metropolis of Heaven;
Chief of the mitred saints, and from archprelate here,
    Translated to archangel there.

RHYME a a b b b c c d e e d f f g g h h i i j j k k l l

Since, happy saint, since it has been of late
  Either our blindness or our fate,
  To lose the providence of thy cares
Pity a miserable church's tears,
  That begs the powerful blessing of thy prayers.
  Some angel, say, what were the nation's crimes,
  That sent these wild reformers to our times:
    Say what their senseless malice meant,
    To tear religion's lovely face:
  Strip her of every ornament and grace;
In striving to wash off th'imaginary paint?
 Religion now does on her death-bed lie,
Heart-sick of a high fever and consuming atrophy;
How the physicians swarm to show their mortal skill,
And by their college arts methodically kill:
Reformers and physicians differ but in name,
  One end in both, and the design the same;
Cordials are in their talk, while all they mean
  Is but the patient's death, and gain--
  Check in thy satire, angry Muse,
  Or a more worthy subject choose:
Let not the outcasts of an outcast age
Provoke the honour of my Muse's rage,
  Nor be thy mighty spirit rais'd,
  Since Heaven and Cato both are pleas'd--

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

To purchase kingdoms and to buy renown,
  Are arts peculiar to dissembling France;
You, mighty monarch, nobler actions crown,
  And solid virtue does your name advance.

RHYME a b a b 

Your matchless courage with your prudence joins,
  The glorious structure of your fame to raise;
With its own light your dazzling glory shines,
  And into adoration turns our praise.

RHYME a b a b 

Had you by dull succession gain'd your crown,
  (Cowards are monarchs by that title made,)
Part of your merit Chance would call her own,
  And half your virtues had been lost in shade.

RHYME a b a b 

But now your worth its just reward shall have:
  What trophies and what triumphs are your due!
Who could so well a dying nation save,
  At once deserve a crown, and gain it too.

RHYME a b a b 

You saw how near we were to ruin brought,
  You saw th'impetuous torrent rolling on;
And timely on the coming danger thought,
  Which we could neither obviate nor shun.

RHYME a b a b 

Britannia stripp'd of her sole guard, the laws,
  Ready to fall Rome's bloody sacrifice;
You straight stepp'd in, and from the monster's jaws
  Did bravely snatch the lovely, helpless prize.

RHYME a b a b 

Nor this is all; as glorious is the care
  To preserve conquests, as at first to gain:
In this your virtue claims a double share,
  Which, what it bravely won, does well maintain.

RHYME a b a b 

Your arm has now your rightful title show'd,
  An arm on which all Europe's hopes depend,
To which they look as to some guardian God,
  That must their doubtful liberty defend.

RHYME a b a b 

Amazed, thy action at the Boyne we see!
  When Schomberg started at the vast design:
The boundless glory all redounds to thee,
  The impulse, the fight, th'event, were wholly thine.

RHYME a b a b 

The brave attempt does all our foes disarm;
  You need but now give orders and command,
Your name shall the remaining work perform,
  And spare the labour of your conquering hand.

RHYME a b a b 

France does in vain her feeble arts apply,
  To interrupt the fortune of your course:
Your influence does the vain attacks defy
  Of secret malice, or of open force.

RHYME a b a b 

Boldly we hence the brave commencement date
  Of glorious deeds, that must all tongues employ;
William's the pledge and earnest given by fate,
  Of England's glory, and her lasting joy.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

    And thus undoubtedly 'twill fare
    With what unhappy men shall dare
  To be successors to these great unknown,
    On learning's high-establish'd throne.
    Censure, and Pedantry, and Pride,
Numberless nations, stretching far and wide,
Shall (I foresee it) soon with Gothic swarms come forth
    From Ignorance's universal North,

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

And with blind rage break all this peaceful government:
Yet shall the traces of your wit remain,
  Like a just map, to tell the vast extent
  Of conquest in your short and happy reign:
    And to all future mankind shew
    How strange a paradox is true,
  That men who lived and died without a name
Are the chief heroes in the sacred lists of fame.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Thrice, with a prophet's voice, and prophet's power,
  The Muse was called in a poetic hour,
And insolently thrice the slighted maid
Dared to suspend her unregarded aid;
Then with that grief we form in spirits divine,
Pleads for her own neglect, and thus reproaches mine.
  Once highly honoured! false is the pretence
You make to truth, retreat, and innocence!
Who, to pollute my shades, bring'st with thee down
The most ungenerous vices of the town;
Ne'er sprung a youth from out this isle before
I once esteem'd, and loved, and favour'd more,
Nor ever maid endured such courtlike scorn,
So much in mode, so very city-born;
'Tis with a foul design the Muse you send,
Like a cast mistress, to your wicked friend;
But find some new address, some fresh deceit,
Nor practise such an antiquated cheat;
These are the beaten methods of the stews,
Stale forms, of course, all mean deceivers use,
Who barbarously think to 'scape reproach,
By prostituting her they first debauch.

RHYME a a *

  Thus did the Muse severe unkindly blame
This offering long design'd to Congreve's fame;
First chid the zeal as unpoetic fire,
Which soon his merit forced her to inspire;
Then call this verse, that speaks her largest aid,
The greatest compliment she ever made,
And wisely judge, no power beneath divine
Could leap the bounds which part your world and mine;
For, youth, believe, to you unseen, is fix'd
A mighty gulf, unpassable betwixt.
  Nor tax the goddess of a mean design
To praise your parts by publishing of mine;
That be my thought when some large bulky writ
Shows in the front the ambition of my wit;
There to surmount what bears me up, and sing
Like the victorious wren perch'd on the eagle's wing.
This could I do, and proudly o'er him tower,
Were my desires but heighten'd to my power.
  Godlike the force of my young Congreve's bays,
Softening the Muse's thunder into praise;
Sent to assist an old unvanquish'd pride
That looks with scorn on half mankind beside;
A pride that well suspends poor mortals' fate,
Gets between them and my resentment's weight,
Stands in the gap 'twixt me and wretched men,
T'avert th'impending judgments of my pen.

RHYME a a *

  Thus I look down with mercy on the age,
By hopes my Congreve will reform the stage:
For never did poetic mind before
Produce a richer vein, or cleaner ore;
The bullion stamp'd in your refining mind
Serves by retail to furnish half mankind.
With indignation I behold your wit
Forced on me, crack'd, and clipp'd, and counterfeit,
By vile pretenders, who a stock maintain
From broken scraps and filings of your brain.
Through native dross your share is hardly known,
And by short views mistook for all their own;
So small the gains those from your wit do reap,
Who blend it into folly's larger heap,
Like the sun's scatter'd beams which loosely pass,
When some rough hand breaks the assembling glass.
  Yet want your critics no just cause to rail,
Since knaves are ne'er obliged for what they steal.
These pad on wit's high road, and suits maintain
With those they rob, by what their trade does gain.
Thus censure seems that fiery froth which breeds
O'er the sun's face, and from his heat proceeds,
Crusts o'er the day, shadowing its partent beam,
As ancient nature's modern masters dream;
This bids some curious praters here below
Call Titan sick, because their sight is so;
And well, methinks, does this allusion fit
To scribblers, and the god of light and wit;
Those who by wild delusions entertain
A lust of rhyming for a poet's vein,
Raise envy's clouds to leave themselves in night,
But can no more obscure my Congreve's light,
Than swarms of gnats, that wanton in a ray
Which gave them birth, can rob the world of day.

RHYME a a *

  What northern hive pour'd out these foes to wit?
Whence came these Goths to overrun the pit?
How would you blush the shameful birth to hear
Of those you so ignobly stoop to fear;
For, ill to them, long have I travell'd since,
Round all the circles of impertinence,
Search'd in the nest where every worm did lie
Before it grew a city butterfly;
I'm sure I found them other kind of things
Than those with backs of silk and golden wings;
A search, no doubt, as curious and as wise
As virtuosoes' in dissecting flies:
For, could you think? the fiercest foes you dread,
And court in prologues, all are country bred;
Bred in my scene, and for the poet's sins
Adjourn'd from tops and grammar to the inns;
Those beds of dung, where schoolboys sprout up beaux
Far sooner than the nobler mushroom grows:
These are the lords of the poetic schools,
Who preach the saucy pedantry of rules;
Those powers the critics, who may boast the odds
O'er Nile, with all its wilderness of gods;
Nor could the nations kneel to viler shapes,
Which worshipp'd cats, and sacrificed to apes;
And can you think the wise forbear to laugh
At the warm zeal that breeds this golden calf?

RHYME a a *

   Haply you judge these lines severely writ
Against the proud usurpers of the pit;
Stay while I tell my story, short, and true;
To draw conclusions shall be left to you;
Nor need I ramble far to force a rule,
But lay the scene just here at Farnham school.
   Last year, a lad hence by his parents sent
With other cattle to the city went;
Where having cast his coat, and well pursued
The methods most in fashion to be lewd,
Return'd a finish'd spark this summer down,
Stock'd with the freshest gibberish of the town;
A jargon form'd from the lost language, wit,
Confounded in that Babel of the pit;
Form'd by diseased conceptions, weak and wild,
Sick lust of souls, and an abortive child;
Born between whores and fops, by lewd compacts,
Before the play, or else between the acts;
Nor wonder, if from such polluted minds
Should spring such short and transitory kinds,
Or crazy rules to make us wits by rote,
Last just as long as every cuckoo's note:
What bungling, rusty tools are used by fate!
'Twas in an evil hour to urge my hate,

RHYME a a *

My hate, whose lash just Heaven has long decreed
Shall on a day make sin and folly bleed:
When man's ill genius to my presence sent
This wretch, to rouse my wrath, for ruin meant;
Who in his idiom vile, with Gray's-Inn grace,
Squander'd his noisy talents to my face;
Named every player on his fingers' ends,
Swore all the wits were his peculiar friends;
Talk'd with that saucy and familiar ease
Of Wycherly, and you, and Mr. Bayes:
Said, how a late report your friends had vex'd,
Who heard you meant to write heroics next;
For, tragedy, he knew, would lose you quite,
And told you so at Will's but t'other night.

RHYME a a *

  Thus are the lives of fools a sort of dreams,
Rendering shades things, and substances of names;
Such high companions may delusion keep,
Lords are a footboy's cronies in his sleep.
As a fresh miss, by fancy, face, and gown,
Render'd the topping beauty of the town,
Draws every rhyming, prating, dressing sot,
To boast of favours that he never got;
Of which, whoe'er lacks confidence to prate,
Brings his good parts and breeding in debate;
And not the meanest coxcomb you can find,
But thanks his stars, that Phillis has been kind;
Thus prostitute my Congreve's name is grown
To every lewd pretender of the town.
Troth, I could pity you; but this is it,
You find, to be the fashionable wit;
These are the slaves whom reputation chains,
Whose maintenance requires no help from brains.
For, should the vilest scribbler to the pit,
Whom sin and want e'er furnish'd out a wit;
Whose name must not within my lines be shown,
Lest here it live, when perish'd with his own;
Should such a wretch usurp my Congreve's place,
And choose out wits who ne'er have seen his face;
I'll bet my life but the dull cheat would pass,
Nor need the lion's skin conceal the ass;
Yes, that beau's look, that vice, those critic ears,
Must needs be right, so well resembling theirs.

RHYME a a *

  Perish the Muse's hour thus vainly spent
In satire, to my Congreve's praises meant;
In how ill season her resentments rule,
What's that to her if mankind be a fool?
Happy beyond a private Muse's fate,
In pleasing all that's good among the great,
Where though her elder sisters crowding throng,
She still is welcome with her innocent song;
Whom were my Congreve blest to see and know,
What poor regards would merit all below!
How proudly would he haste the joy to meet,
And drop his laurel at Apollo's feet!
  Here by a mountain's side, a reverend cave
Gives murmuring passage to a lasting wave:
'Tis the world's watery hour-glass streaming fast,
Time is no more when th'utmost drop is past;
Here, on a better day, some druid dwelt,
And the young Muse's early favour felt;
Druid, a name she does with pride repeat,
Confessing Albion once her darling seat;
Far in this primitive cell might we pursue
Our predecessors' footsteps still in view;
Here would we sing--But, ah! you think I dream,
And the bad world may well believe the same;
Yes: you are all malicious slanders by,
While two fond lovers prate, the Muse and I.
  Since thus I wander from my first intent,
Nor am that grave adviser which I meant,
Take this short lesson from the god of bays,
And let my friend apply it as he please:

TITLE

RHYME a b c a c b 

Beat not the dirty paths where vulgar feet have trod,
      But give the vigorous fancy room.
  For when, like stupid alchymists, you try
      To fix this nimble god,
        This volatile mercury,
  The subtile spirit all flies up in fume;

RHYME a a *

  Nor shall the bubbled virtuoso find
More than _fade_ insipid mixture left behind.
  While thus I write, vast shoals of critics come,
And on my verse pronounce their saucy doom;
The Muse like some bright country virgin shows
Fallen by mishap among a knot of beaux;
They, in their lewd and fashionable prate,
Rally her dress, her language, and her gait;
Spend their base coin before the bashful maid,
Current like copper, and as often paid:
She, who on shady banks has joy'd to sleep
Near better animals, her father's sheep,
Shamed and amazed, beholds the chattering throng,
To think what cattle she is got among;
But with the odious smell and sight annoy'd,
In haste she does th'offensive herd avoid.
  'Tis time to bid my friend a long farewell,
The muse retreats far in yon crystal cell;
Faint inspiration sickens as she flies,
Like distant echo spent, the spirit dies.
  In this descending sheet you'll haply find
Some short refreshment for your weary mind,
Nought it contains is common or unclean,
And once drawn up, is ne'er let down again.

RHYME a a *

Strange to conceive, how the same objects strike
At distant hours the mind with forms so like!
Whether in time, Deduction's broken chain
Meets, and salutes her sister link again;
Or haunted Fancy, by a circling flight,
Comes back with joy to its own seat at night;
Or whether dead Imagination's ghost
Oft hovers where alive it haunted most;
Or if Thought's rolling globe, her circle run,
Turns up old objects to the soul her sun;
Or loves the Muse to walk with conscious pride
O'er the glad scene whence first she rose a bride:
  Be what it will; late near yon whispering stream,
Where her own Temple was her darling theme;
There first the visionary sound was heard,
When to poetic view the Muse appear'd.
Such seem'd her eyes, as when an evening ray
Gives glad farewell to a tempestuous day;
Weak is the beam to dry up Nature's tears,
Still every tree the pendent sorrow wears;
Such are the smiles where drops of crystal show
Approaching joy at strife with parting woe.
  As when, to scare th'ungrateful or the proud,
Tempests long frown, and thunder threatens loud,
Till the blest sun, to give kind dawn of grace,
Darts weeping beams across Heaven's watery face;
When soon the peaceful bow unstring'd is shown,
A sign God's dart is shot, and wrath o'erblown:
Such to unhallow'd sight the Muse divine
Might seem, when first she raised her eyes to mine.
  What mortal change does in thy face appear,
Lost youth, she cried, since first I met thee here!
With how undecent clouds are overcast
Thy looks, when every cause of grief is past!
Unworthy the glad tidings which I bring,
Listen while the Muse thus teaches thee to sing:

RHYME a a *

As parent earth, burst by imprison'd winds,
Scatters strange agues o'er men's sickly minds,
And shakes the atheist's knees; such ghastly fear
Late I beheld on every face appear;
Mild Dorothea, peaceful, wise, and great,
Trembling beheld the doubtful hand of fate;
Mild Dorothea, whom we both have long
Not dared to injure with our lowly song;
Sprung from a better world, and chosen then
The best companion for the best of men:
As some fair pile, yet spared by zeal and rage,
Lives pious witness of a better age;
So men may see what once was womankind,
In the fair shrine of Dorothea's mind.
  You that would grief describe, come here and trace
Its watery footsteps in Dorinda's face:
Grief from Dorinda's face does ne'er depart
Farther than its own palace in her heart:
Ah, since our fears are fled, this insolent expel,
At least confine the tyrant to his cell.
And if so black the cloud that Heaven's bright queen
Shrouds her still beams; how should the stars be seen?
Thus when Dorinda wept, joy every face forsook,
And grief flung sables on each menial look;
The humble tribe mourn'd for the quick'ning soul,
That furnish'd spirit and motion through the whole;
So would earth's face turn pale, and life decay,
Should Heaven suspend to act but for a day;
So nature's crazed convulsions make us dread
That time is sick, or the world's mind is dead.--
Take, youth, these thoughts, large matter to employ
The fancy furnish'd by returning joy;
And to mistaken man these truths rehearse,
Who dare revile the integrity of verse:
Ah, favourite youth, how happy is thy lot!--
But I'm deceived, or thou regard'st me not;
Speak, for I wait thy answer, and expect
Thy just submission for this bold neglect.

RHYME a a *

Unknown the forms we the high-priesthood use
At the divine appearance of the Muse,
Which to divulge might shake profane belief,
And tell the irreligion of my grief;
Grief that excused the tribute of my knees,
And shaped my passion in such words as these!

RHYME a a *

Malignant goddess! bane to my repose,
Thou universal cause of all my woes;
Say whence it comes that thou art grown of late
A poor amusement for my scorn and hate;
The malice thou inspirest I never fail
On thee to wreak the tribute when I rail;
Fool's commonplace thou art, their weak ensconcing fort,
Th'appeal of dulness in the last resort:
Heaven, with a parent's eye regarding earth,
Deals out to man the planet of his birth:
But sees thy meteor blaze about me shine,
And passing o'er, mistakes thee still for mine:
Ah, should I tell a secret yet unknown,
That thou ne'er hadst a being of thy own,
But a wild form dependent on the brain,
Scattering loose features o'er the optic vein;
Troubling the crystal fountain of the sight,
Which darts on poets' eyes a trembling light;
Kindled while reason sleeps, but quickly flies,
Like antic shapes in dreams, from waking eyes:
In sum, a glitt'ring voice, a painted name,
A walking vapour, like thy sister fame.

RHYME a a *

But if thou be'st what thy mad votaries prate,
A female power, loose govern'd thoughts create;
Why near the dregs of youth perversely wilt thou stay,
So highly courted by the brisk and gay?
Wert thou right woman, thou should'st scorn to look
On an abandon'd wretch by hopes forsook;
Forsook by hopes, ill fortune's last relief,
Assign'd for life to unremitting grief;
For, let Heaven's wrath enlarge these weary days,
If hope e'er dawns the smallest of its rays.
Time o'er the happy takes so swift a flight,
And treads so soft, so easy, and so light,
That we the wretched, creeping far behind,
Can scarce th'impression of his footsteps find;
Smooth as that airy nymph so subtly born
With inoffensive feet o'er standing corn;
Which bow'd by evening breeze with bending stalks,
Salutes the weary traveller as he walks;
But o'er the afflicted with a heavy pace
Sweeps the broad scythe, and tramples on his face.
Down falls the summer's pride, and sadly shows
Nature's bare visage furrow'd as he mows:
See, Muse, what havoc in these looks appear,
These are the tyrant's trophies of a year;
Since hope his last and greatest foe is fled,
Despair and he lodge ever in its stead;
March o'er the ruin'd plain with motion slow,
Still scattering desolation where they go.

RHYME a a *

To thee I owe that fatal bent of mind,
Still to unhappy restless thoughts inclined;
To thee, what oft I vainly strive to hide,
That scorn of fools, by fools mistook for pride;
From thee whatever virtue takes its rise,
Grows a misfortune, or becomes a vice;
Such were thy rules to be poetically great:
"Stoop not to interest, flattery, or deceit;
Nor with hired thoughts be thy devotion paid;
Learn to disdain their mercenary aid;
Be this thy sure defence, thy brazen wall,
Know no base action, at no guilt turn pale;
And since unhappy distance thus denies
T'expose thy soul, clad in this poor disguise;
Since thy few ill-presented graces seem
To breed contempt where thou hast hoped esteem--"
   Madness like this no fancy ever seized,
Still to be cheated, never to be pleased;
Since one false beam of joy in sickly minds
Is all the poor content delusion finds.--
There thy enchantment broke, and from this hour
I here renounce thy visionary power;
And since thy essence on my breath depends
Thus with a puff the whole delusion ends.

RHYME a a *

Peruse my leaves thro' ev'ry part,
And think thou seest my owner's heart,
Scrawl'd o'er with trifles thus, and quite
As hard, as senseless, and as light;
Expos'd to ev'ry coxcomb's eyes,
But hid with caution from the wise.
Here you may read, "Dear charming saint;"
Beneath, "A new receipt for paint:"
Here, in beau-spelling, "Tru tel deth;"
There, in her own, "For an el breth:"
Here, "Lovely nymph, pronounce my doom!"
There, "A safe way to use perfume:"
Here, a page fill'd with billets-doux;
On t'other side, "Laid out for shoes"--
"Madam, I die without your grace"--
"Item, for half a yard of lace."
Who that had wit would place it here,
For ev'ry peeping fop to jeer?
To think that your brains' issue is
Exposed to th'excrement of his,
In pow'r of spittle and a clout,
Whene'er he please, to blot it out;
And then, to heighten the disgrace,
Clap his own nonsense in the place.
Whoe'er expects to hold his part
In such a book, and such a heart,
If he be wealthy, and a fool,
Is in all points the fittest tool;
Of whom it may be justly said,
He's a gold pencil tipp'd with lead.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

My Lord, to find out who must deal,
  Delivers cards about,
But the first knave does seldom fail
  To find the doctor out.

RHYME a b a b 

But then his honour cried, Gadzooks!
  And seem'd to knit his brow:
For on a knave he never looks
  But he thinks upon Jack How.

RHYME a b a b 

My lady, though she is no player,
  Some bungling partner takes,
And, wedged in corner of a chair,
  Takes snuff, and holds the stakes.

RHYME a b a b 

Dame Floyd looks out in grave suspense
  For pair royals and sequents;
But, wisely cautious of her pence,
  The castle seldom frequents.

RHYME a b a b 

Quoth Herries, fairly putting cases,
  I'd won it, on my word,
If I had but a pair of aces,
  And could pick up a third.

RHYME a b a b 

But Weston has a new-cast gown
  On Sundays to be fine in,
And, if she can but win a crown,
  'Twill just new dye the lining.

RHYME a b a b 

"With these is Parson Swift,
  Not knowing how to spend his time,
Does make a wretched shift,
  To deafen them with puns and rhyme."

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c c d d e e 

Once on a time, as old stories rehearse,
  A friar would need show his talent in Latin;
But was sorely put to 't in the midst of a verse,
  Because he could find no word to come pat in;
           Then all in the place
           He left a void space,
    And so went to bed in a desperate case:
When behold the next morning a wonderful riddle!
He found it was strangely fill'd up in the middle.
  CHO. Let censuring critics then think what they list on't;
    Who would not write verses with such an assistant?

RHYME a b a b c c c d d 

This put me the friar into an amazement;
  For he wisely consider'd it must be a sprite;
That he came through the keyhole, or in at the casement;
  And it needs must be one that could both read and write;
         Yet he did not know,
         If it were friend or foe,
  Or whether it came from above or below;
Howe'er, it was civil, in angel or elf,
For he ne'er could have fill'd it so well of himself.
 
RHYME a b a b c c c d d 

Even so Master Doctor had puzzled his brains
  In making a ballad, but was at a stand;
He had mixt little wit with a great deal of pains,
  When he found a new help from invisible hand.
        Then, good Doctor Swift
        Pay thanks for the gift,
  For you freely must own you were at a dead lift;
And, though some malicious young spirit did do't,
You may know by the hand it had no cloven foot.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b *

When wise Lord Berkeley first came here,
  Statesmen and mob expected wonders,
Nor thought to find so great a peer
  Ere a week past committing blunders.
Till on a day cut out by fate,
  When folks came thick to make their court,
Out slipt a mystery of state
  To give the town and country sport.
Now enters Bush with new state airs,
  His lordship's premier minister;
And who in all profound affairs,
  Is held as needful as his clyster.
With head reclining on his shoulder,
  He deals and hears mysterious chat,
While every ignorant beholder
  Asks of his neighbour, who is that?
With this he put up to my lord,
  The courtiers kept their distance due,
He twitch'd his sleeve, and stole a word;
  Then to a corner both withdrew.
Imagine now my lord and Bush
  Whispering in junto most profound,
Like good King Phys and good King Ush,
  While all the rest stood gaping round.
At length a spark, not too well bred,
  Of forward face and ear acute,
Advanced on tiptoe, lean'd his head,
  To overhear the grand dispute;
To learn what Northern kings design,
  Or from Whitehall some new express,
Papists disarm'd, or fall of coin;
  For sure (thought he) it can't be less.
My lord, said Bush, a friend and I,
  Disguised in two old threadbare coats,
Ere morning's dawn, stole out to spy
  How markets went for hay and oats.
With that he draws two handfuls out,
  The one was oats, the other hay;
Puts this to's excellency's snout,
  And begs he would the other weigh.
My lord seems pleased, but still directs
  By all means to bring down the rates;
Then, with a congee circumflex,
  Bush, smiling round on all, retreats.
Our listener stood awhile confused,
  But gathering spirits, wisely ran for't,
Enraged to see the world abused,
  By two such whispering kings of Brentford.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Did ever problem thus perplex,
Or more employ the female sex?
So sweet a passion who would think,
Jove ever form'd to make a stink?
The ladies vow and swear, they'll try,
Whether it be a truth or lie.
Love's fire, it seems, like inward heat,
Works in my lord by stool and sweat,
Which brings a stink from every pore,
And from behind and from before;
Yet what is wonderful to tell it,
None but the favourite nymph can smell it.
But now, to solve the natural cause
By sober philosophic laws;
Whether all passions, when in ferment,
Work out as anger does in vermin;
So, when a weasel you torment,
You find his passion by his scent.
We read of kings, who, in a fright,
Though on a throne, would fall to shite
Beside all this, deep scholars know,
That the main string of Cupid's bow,
Once on a time was an a-- gut;
Now to a nobler office put,
By favour or desert preferr'd
From giving passage to a t--;
But still, though fix'd among the stars,
Does sympathize with human a--.
Thus, when you feel a hard-bound breech,
Conclude love's bow-string at full stretch,
Till the kind looseness comes, and then,
Conclude the bow relax'd again.
  And now, the ladies all are bent,
To try the great experiment,
Ambitious of a regent's heart,
Spread all their charms to catch a fart
Watching the first unsavoury wind,
Some ply before, and some behind.
My lord, on fire amid the dames,
F--ts like a laurel in the flames.
The fair approach the speaking part,
To try the back-way to his heart.
For, as when we a gun discharge,
Although the bore be none so large,
Before the flame from muzzle burst,
Just at the breech it flashes first;
So from my lord his passion broke,
He f--d first and then he spoke.
  The ladies vanish in the smother,
To confer notes with one another;
And now they all agreed to name
Whom each one thought the happy dame.
Quoth Neal, whate'er the rest may think,
I'm sure 'twas I that smelt the stink.
You smell the stink! by G--d, you lie,
Quoth Ross, for I'll be sworn 'twas I.
Ladies, quoth Levens, pray forbear;
Let's not fall out; we all had share;
And, by the most I can discover,
My lord's a universal lover.

RHYME a a *

As mastiff dogs, in modern phrase, are
Call'd _Pompey, Scipio_, and _Caesar;_
As pies and daws are often styl'd
With Christian nicknames, like a child;
As we say _Monsieur_ to an ape,
Without offence to human shape;
So men have got, from bird and brute,
Names that would best their nature suit.
The _Lion, Eagle, Fox_, and _Boar_,
Were heroes' titles heretofore,
Bestow'd as hi'roglyphics fit
To show their valour, strength, or wit:
For what is understood by _fame_,
Besides the getting of a _name?_
But, e'er since men invented guns,
A diff'rent way their fancy runs:
To paint a hero, we inquire
For something that will conquer _fire._
Would you describe _Turenne_ or _Trump?_
Think of a _bucket_ or a _pump._
Are these too low?--then find out grander,
Call my LORD CUTTS a _Salamander._

RHYME a a *

'Tis well;--but since we live among
Detractors with an evil tongue,
Who may object against the term,
Pliny shall prove what we affirm:
Pliny shall prove, and we'll apply,
And I'll be judg'd by standers by.
First, then, our author has defined
This reptile of the serpent kind,
With gaudy coat, and shining train;
But loathsome spots his body stain:
Out from some hole obscure he flies,
When rains descend, and tempests rise,
Till the sun clears the air; and then
Crawls back neglected to his den.

RHYME a a *

  So, when the war has raised a storm,
I've seen a snake in human form,
All stain'd with infamy and vice,
Leap from the dunghill in a trice,
Burnish and make a gaudy show,
Become a general, peer, and beau,
Till peace has made the sky serene,
Then shrink into its hole again.
"All this we grant--why then, look yonder,
Sure that must be a Salamander!"

RHYME a a *

  Further, we are by Pliny told,
This serpent is extremely cold;
So cold, that, put it in the fire,
'Twill make the very flames expire:
Besides, it spues a filthy froth
(Whether thro' rage or lust or both)
Of matter purulent and white,
Which, happening on the skin to light,
And there corrupting to a wound,
Spreads leprosy and baldness round.

RHYME a a *

  So have I seen a batter'd beau,
By age and claps grown cold as snow,
Whose breath or touch, where'er he came,
Blew out love's torch, or chill'd the flame:
And should some nymph, who ne'er was cruel,
Like Carleton cheap, or famed Du-Ruel,
Receive the filth which he ejects,
She soon would find the same effects
Her tainted carcass to pursue,
As from the Salamander's spue;
A dismal shedding of her locks,
And, if no leprosy, a pox.
"Then I'll appeal to each bystander,
If this be not a Salamander?"

TITLE

RHYME a a a 

  Mordanto fills the trump of fame,
The Christian world his deeds proclaim,
And prints are crowded with his name.

RHYME a a a 

  In journeys he outrides the post,
Sits up till midnight with his host,
Talks politics, and gives the toast.

RHYME a a a 

  Knows every prince in Europe's face,
Flies like a squib from place to place,
And travels not, but runs a race.

RHYME a a a 

  From Paris gazette à-la-main,
This day arriv'd, without his train,
Mordanto in a week from Spain.

RHYME a a a 

  A messenger comes all a-reek
Mordanto at Madrid to seek;
He left the town above a week.

RHYME a a a 

  Next day the post-boy winds his horn,
And rides through Dover in the morn:
Mordanto's landed from Leghorn.

RHYME a a a 

  Mordanto gallops on alone,
The roads are with his followers strewn,
This breaks a girth, and that a bone;

RHYME a a a 

  His body active as his mind,
Returning sound in limb and wind,
Except some leather lost behind.

RHYME a a a 

  A skeleton in outward figure,
His meagre corps, though full of vigour,
Would halt behind him, were it bigger.

RHYME a a a 

  So wonderful his expedition,
When you have not the least suspicion,
He's with you like an apparition.

RHYME a a a 

  Shines in all climates like a star;
In senates bold, and fierce in war;
A land commander, and a tar:

RHYME a a a 

  Heroic actions early bred in,
Ne'er to be match'd in modern reading,
But by his namesake, Charles of Sweden.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

The queen has lately lost a part
Of her ENTIRELY-ENGLISH heart,
For want of which, by way of botch,
She pieced it up again with SCOTCH.
Blest revolution! which creates
Divided hearts, united states!
See how the double nation lies,
Like a rich coat with skirts of frize:
As if a man, in making posies,
Should bundle thistles up with roses.
Who ever yet a union saw
Of kingdoms without faith or law?
Henceforward let no statesman dare
A kingdom to a ship compare;
Lest he should call our commonweal
A vessel with a double keel:
Which, just like ours, new rigg'd and mann'd,
And got about a league from land,
By change of wind to leeward side,
The pilot knew not how to guide.
So tossing faction will o'erwhelm
Our crazy double-bottom'd realm.

RHYME a a *

When Cupid did his grandsire Jove entreat
To form some Beauty by a new receipt, 
Jove sent, and found, far in a country scene,
Truth, innocence, good nature, look serene:
From which ingredients first the dext'rous boy
Pick'd the demure, the awkward, and the coy.
The Graces from the court did next provide
Breeding, and wit, and air, and decent pride:
These Venus cleans'd from ev'ry spurious grain
Of nice coquet, affected, pert, and vain.
Jove mix'd up all, and the best clay employ'd;
Then call'd the happy composition FLOYD.

RHYME a a *

Venus one day, as story goes,
But for what reason no man knows,
In sullen mood and grave deport,
Trudged it away to Jove's high court;
And there his Godship did entreat
To look out for his best receipt:
And make a monster strange and odd,
Abhorr'd by man and every god.
Jove, ever kind to all the fair,
Nor e'er refused a lady's prayer,
Straight oped 'scrutoire, and forth he took
A neatly bound and well-gilt book;
Sure sign that nothing enter'd there,
But what was very choice and rare.
Scarce had he turn'd a page or two,--
It might be more, for aught I knew;
But, be the matter more or less,
'Mong friends 'twill break no squares, I guess.
Then, smiling, to the dame quoth he,
Here's one will fit you to a T.
But, as the writing doth prescribe,
'Tis fit the ingredients we provide.
Away he went, and search'd the stews,
And every street about the Mews;
Diseases, impudence, and lies,
Are found and brought him in a trice.
From Hackney then he did provide,
A clumsy air and awkward pride;
From lady's toilet next he brought
Noise, scandal, and malicious thought.
These Jove put in an old close-stool,
And with them mix'd the vain, the fool.
  But now came on his greatest care,
Of what he should his paste prepare;
For common clay or finer mould
Was much too good, such stuff to hold.
At last he wisely thought on mud;
So raised it up, and call'd it--_Cludd._
With this, the lady well content,
Low curtsey'd, and away she went.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Phoebus, now short'ning every shade,
  Up to the northern _tropic_ came,
And thence beheld a lovely maid,
  Attending on a royal dame.

RHYME a b a b 

The god laid down his feeble rays,
  Then lighted from his glitt'ring coach;
But fenc'd his head with his own bays,
  Before he durst the nymph approach.

RHYME a b a b 

Under those sacred leaves, secure
  From common lightning of the skies,
He fondly thought he might endure
  The flashes of Ardelia's eyes.

RHYME a b a b 

The nymph, who oft had read in books
  Of that bright god whom bards invoke,
Soon knew Apollo by his looks,
  And guess'd his business ere he spoke.

RHYME a b a b 

He, in the old celestial cant,
  Confess'd his flame, and swore by Styx,
Whate'er she would desire, to grant--
  But wise Ardelia knew his tricks.

RHYME a b a b 

Ovid had warn'd her to beware
  Of strolling gods, whose usual trade is,
Under pretence of taking air,
  To pick up sublunary ladies.

RHYME a b a b 

Howe'er, she gave no flat denial,
  As having malice in her heart;
And was resolv'd upon a trial,
  To cheat the god in his own art.

RHYME a b a b 

"Hear my request," the virgin said;
  "Let which I please of all the Nine
Attend, whene'er I want their aid,
  Obey my call, and only mine."

RHYME a b a b 

By vow oblig'd, by passion led,
  The god could not refuse her prayer:
He way'd his wreath thrice o'er her head,
  Thrice mutter'd something to the air.

RHYME a b a b 

And now he thought to seize his due;
  But she the charm already try'd:
Thalia heard the call, and flew
  To wait at bright Ardelia's side.

RHYME a b a b 

On sight of this celestial _prude_,
  Apollo thought it vain to stay;
Nor in her presence durst be rude,
  But made his leg and went away.

RHYME a b a b 

He hop'd to find some lucky hour,
  When on their queen the Muses wait;
But Pallas owns Ardelia's power:
  For vows divine are kept by Fate.

RHYME a b a b 

Then, full of rage, Apollo spoke:
  "Deceitful nymph! I see thy art;
And, though I can't my gift revoke,
  I'll disappoint its nobler part.

RHYME a b a b 

"Let stubborn pride possess thee long,
  And be thou negligent of fame;
With ev'ry Muse to grace thy song,
  May'st thou despise a poet's name!

RHYME a b a b 

"Of modest poets be thou first;
  To silent shades repeat thy verse,
Till Fame and Echo almost burst,
  Yet hardly dare one line rehearse.

RHYME a b a b 

"And last, my vengeance to compleat,
  May you descend to take renown,
Prevail'd on by the thing you hate,
  A Whig! and one that wears a gown!"

RHYME a b a b 

In pity to the empty'ng Town,
  Some God May Fair invented,
When Nature would invite us down,
  To be by Art prevented.

RHYME a b a b 

What a corrupted taste is ours
  When milk maids in mock state
Instead of garlands made of Flowers
  Adorn their pails with plate.

RHYME a b a b 

So are the joys which Nature yields
  Inverted in May Fair,
In painted cloth we look for fields,
  And step in Booths for air.

RHYME a b a b 

Here a Dog dancing on his hams
  And puppets mov'd by wire,
Do far exceed your frisking lambs,
  Or song of feather'd quire.

RHYME a b a b 

Howe'er, such verse as yours I grant
  Would be but too inviting:
Were fair Ardelia not my Aunt,
  Or were it Worsley's writing.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

In times of old, when Time was young,
And poets their own verses sung,
A verse would draw a stone or beam,
That now would overload a team;
Lead 'em a dance of many a mile,
Then rear 'em to a goodly pile.
Each number had its diff'rent power;
Heroic strains could build a tower;
Sonnets and elegies to Chloris,
Might raise a house about two stories;
A lyric ode would slate; a catch
Would tile; an epigram would thatch.
 
RHYME a a *

 Now Poets feel this art is lost,
Both to their own and landlord's cost.
Not one of all the tuneful throng
Can hire a lodging for a song.
For Jove consider'd well the case,
That poets were a numerous race;
And if they all had power to build,
The earth would very soon be fill'd:
Materials would be quickly spent,
And houses would not give a rent.
The God of Wealth was therefore made
Sole patron of the building trade;
Leaving to wits the spacious air,
With license to build castles there:
In right whereof their old pretence
To lodge in garrets comes from thence.
There is a worm by Phoebus bred,
By leaves of mulberry is fed,
Which unprovided where to dwell,
Conforms itself to weave a cell;
Then curious hands this texture take,
And for themselves fine garments make.
Meantime a pair of awkward things
Grow to his back instead of wings;
He flutters when he thinks he flies,
Then sheds about his spawn and dies.
Just such an insect of the age
Is he that scribbles for the stage;
His birth he does from Phoebus raise,
And feeds upon imagin'd bays;
Throws all his wit and hours away
In twisting up an ill spun Play:
This gives him lodging and provides
A stock of tawdry shift besides.
With the unravell'd shreds of which
The under wits adorn their speech:
And now he spreads his little fans,
(For all the Muses Geese are Swans)
And borne on Fancy's pinions, thinks
He soars sublimest when he sinks:
But scatt'ring round his fly-blows, dies;
Whence broods of insect-poets rise.

RHYME a a *

  Premising thus, in modern way,
The greater part I have to say;
Sing, Muse, the house of Poet Van,
In higher strain than we began.
  Van (for 'tis fit the reader know it)
Is both a Herald and a Poet;
No wonder then if nicely skill'd
In each capacity to build.
As Herald, he can in a day
Repair a house gone to decay;
Or by achievements, arms, device,
Erect a new one in a trice;
And poets, if they had their due,
By ancient right are builders too:
This made him to Apollo pray
For leave to build--the poets way.
His prayer was granted, for the God
Consented with the usual nod.

RHYME a a *

  After hard throes of many a day
Van was delivered of a play,
Which in due time brought forth a house,
Just as the mountain did the mouse.
One story high, one postern door,
And one small chamber on a floor,
Born like a phoenix from the flame:
But neither bulk nor shape the same;
As animals of largest size
Corrupt to maggots, worms, and flies;
A type of modern wit and style,
The rubbish of an ancient pile;
So chemists boast they have a power,
From the dead ashes of a flower
Some faint resemblance to produce,
But not the virtue, taste, nor juice.
So modern rhymers strive to blast
The poetry of ages past;
Which, having wisely overthrown,
They from its ruins build their own.

RHYME a a *

In times of old, when Time was young,
And poets their own verses sung,
A verse would draw a stone or beam,
That now would overload a team;
Lead 'em a dance of many a mile,
Then rear 'em to a goodly pile.
Each number had its diff'rent power;
Heroic strains could build a tower;
Sonnets, or elegies to Chloris,
Might raise a house about two stories;
A lyric ode would slate; a catch
Would tile; an epigram would thatch.

RHYME a a *

  But, to their own or landlord's cost,
Now Poets feel this art is lost.
Not one of all our tuneful throng
Can raise a lodging for a song.
For Jove consider'd well the case,
Observed they grew a numerous race;
And should they build as fast as write,
'Twould ruin undertakers quite.
This evil, therefore, to prevent,
He wisely changed their element:
On earth the God of Wealth was made
Sole patron of the building trade;
Leaving the Wits the spacious air,
With license to build castles there:
And 'tis conceived their old pretence
To lodge in garrets comes from thence.

RHYME a a *

  Premising thus, in modern way,
The better half we have to say;
Sing, Muse, the house of Poet Van,
In higher strains than we began.

RHYME a a *

  Van (for 'tis fit the reader know it)
Is both a Herald and a Poet;
No wonder then if nicely skill'd
In both capacities to build.
As Herald, he can in a day
Repair a house gone to decay;
Or, by achievements, arms, device,
Erect a new one in a trice;
And as a poet, he has skill
To build in speculation still.
"Great Jove!" he cried, "the art restore
To build by verse as heretofore,
And make my Muse the architect;
What palaces shall we erect!
No longer shall forsaken Thames
Lament his old Whitehall in flames;
A pile shall from its ashes rise,
Fit to invade or prop the skies."

RHYME a a *

  Jove smiled, and, like a gentle god,
Consenting with the usual nod,
Told Van, he knew his talent best,
And left the choice to his own breast.
So Van resolved to write a farce;
But, well perceiving wit was scarce,
With cunning that defect supplies:
Takes a French play as lawful prize;
Steals thence his plot and ev'ry joke,
Not once suspecting Jove would smoke;
And (like a wag set down to write)
Would whisper to himself, "a _bite_."
Then, from this motley mingled style,
Proceeded to erect his pile.
So men of old, to gain renown, did
Build Babel with their tongues confounded.
Jove saw the cheat, but thought it best
To turn the matter to a jest;
Down from Olympus' top he slides,
Laughing as if he'd burst his sides:
Ay, thought the god, are these your tricks,
Why then old plays deserve old bricks;
And since you're sparing of your stuff,
Your building shall be small enough.
He spake, and grudging, lent his aid;
Th'experienced bricks, that knew their trade,
(As being bricks at second hand,)
Now move, and now in order stand.

RHYME a a *

  The building, as the Poet writ,
Rose in proportion to his wit--
And first the prologue built a wall;
So wide as to encompass all.
The scene, a wood, produc'd no more
Than a few scrubby trees before.
The plot as yet lay deep; and so
A cellar next was dug below;
But this a work so hard was found,
Two acts it cost him under ground.
Two other acts, we may presume,
Were spent in building each a room.
Thus far advanc'd, he made a shift
To raise a roof with act the fift.
The epilogue behind did frame
A place, not decent here to name.

RHYME a a *

  Now, Poets from all quarters ran,
To see the house of brother Van;
Looked high and low, walk'd often round;
But no such house was to be found.
One asks the watermen hard by,
"Where may the Poet's palace lie?"
Another of the Thames inquires,
If he has seen its gilded spires?
At length they in the rubbish spy
A thing resembling a goose-pie.
Thither in haste the Poets throng,
And gaze in silent wonder long,
Till one in raptures thus began
To praise the pile and builder Van:

RHYME a a *

  "Thrice happy Poet! who may'st trail
Thy house about thee like a snail:
Or harness'd to a nag, at ease
Take journeys in it like a chaise;
Or in a boat whene'er thou wilt,
Can'st make it serve thee for a tilt!
Capacious house! 'tis own'd by all
Thou'rt well contrived, tho' thou art small:
For ev'ry Wit in Britain's isle
May lodge within thy spacious pile.
Like Bacchus thou, as Poets feign,
Thy mother burnt, art born again,
Born like a phoenix from the flame:
But neither bulk nor shape the same;
As animals of largest size
Corrupt to maggots, worms, and flies;
A type of modern wit and style,
The rubbish of an ancient pile;
So chemists boast they have a power,
From the dead ashes of a flower
Some faint resemblance to produce,
But not the virtue, taste, or juice.
So modern rhymers wisely blast
The poetry of ages past;
Which, after they have overthrown,
They from its ruins build their own."

TITLE

RHYME a a *

In ancient time, as story tells,
The saints would often leave their cells,
And stroll about, but hide their quality,
To try good people's hospitality.

RHYME a a *

  It happen'd on a winter's night,
As authors of the legend write,
Two brother hermits, saints by trade,
Taking their tour in masquerade,
Came to a village hard by Rixham,
Ragged and not a groat betwixt 'em.
It rain'd as hard as it could pour,
Yet they were forced to walk an hour
From house to house, wet to the skin,
Before one soul would let 'em in.
They call'd at every door: "Good people,
My comrade's blind, and I'm a creeple!
Here we lie starving in the street,
'Twould grieve a body's heart to see't,

RHYME a a *

No Christian would turn out a beast,
In such a dreadful night at least;
Give us but straw and let us lie
In yonder barn to keep us dry."
Thus in the stroller's usual cant,
They begg'd relief, which none would grant.
No creature valued what they said,
One family was gone to bed:
The master bawled out half asleep,
"You fellows, what a noise you keep!
So many beggars pass this way,
We can't be quiet, night nor day;
We cannot serve you every one;
Pray take your answer, and be gone."
One swore he'd send 'em to the stocks;
A third could not forbear his mocks;
But bawl'd as loud as he could roar
"You're on the wrong side of the door!"
One surly clown look't out and said,
"I'll fling the p--pot on your head:
You sha'nt come here, nor get a sous!
You look like rogues would rob a house.
Can't you go work, or serve the King?
You blind and lame! 'Tis no such thing.
That's but a counterfeit sore leg!
For shame! two sturdy rascals beg!
If I come down, _I'll_ spoil your trick,
And cure you both with a good stick."

RHYME a a *

  Our wand'ring saints, in woful state,
Treated at this ungodly rate,
Having thro' all the village past,
To a small cottage came at last
Where dwelt a good old honest ye'man,
Call'd thereabout good man Philemon;
Who kindly did the saints invite
In his poor house to pass the night;
And then the hospitable sire
Bid Goody Baucis mend the fire;
Whilst he from out the chimney took
A flitch of bacon off the hook,
And freely from the fattest side
Cut out large slices to be fry'd;
Which tost up in a pan with batter,
And served up in an earthen platter,
Quoth Baucis, "This is wholesome fare,
Eat, honest friends, and never spare,
And if we find our victuals fail,
We can but make it out in ale."

RHYME a a *

  To a small kilderkin of beer,
Brew'd for the good time of the year,
Philemon, by his wife's consent,
Stept with a jug, and made a vent,
And having fill'd it to the brink,
Invited both the saints to drink.
When they had took a second draught,
Behold, a miracle was wrought;
For, Baucis with amazement found,
Although the jug had twice gone round,
It still was full up to the top,
As they ne'er had drunk a drop.
You may be sure so strange a sight,
Put the old people in a fright:
Philemon whisper'd to his wife,
"These men are--Saints--I'll lay my life!"
The strangers overheard, and said,
"You're in the right--but be'nt afraid:
No hurt shall come to you or yours:
But for that pack of churlish boors,
Not fit to live on Christian ground,
They and their village shall be drown'd;
Whilst you shall see your cottage rise,
And grow a church before your eyes."

RHYME a a *

  Scarce had they spoke, when fair and soft,
The roof began to mount aloft;
Aloft rose ev'ry beam and rafter;
The heavy wall went clambering after.
The chimney widen'd, and grew higher,
Became a steeple with a spire.
The kettle to the top was hoist,
And there stood fastened to a joist,
But with the upside down, to show
Its inclination for below:
In vain; for a superior force
Applied at bottom stops its course:
Doom'd ever in suspense to dwell,
'Tis now no kettle, but a bell.

RHYME a a *

  The wooden jack, which had almost
Lost by disuse the art to roast,
A sudden alteration feels,
Increas'd by new intestine wheels;
But what adds to the wonder more,
The number made the motion slower.
The flyer, altho't had leaden feet,
Would turn so quick you scarce could see't;
But, now stopt by some hidden powers,
Moves round but twice in twice twelve hours,
While in the station of a jack,
'Twas never known to turn its back,
A friend in turns and windings tried,
Nor ever left the chimney's side.
The chimney to a steeple grown,
The jack would not be left alone;
But, up against the steeple rear'd,
Became a clock, and still adher'd;
And still its love to household cares,
By a shrill voice at noon declares,
Warning the cookmaid not to burn
That roast meat, which it cannot turn.

RHYME a a *

  The groaning-chair began to crawl,
Like a huge insect, up the wall;
There stuck, and to a pulpit grew,
But kept its matter and its hue,
And mindful of its ancient state,
Still groans while tattling gossips prate.
The mortar only chang'd its name,
In its old shape a font became.
  The porringers, that in a row,
Hung high, and made a glitt'ring show,
To a less noble substance chang'd,
Were now but leathern buckets rang'd.

RHYME a a *

  The ballads, pasted on the wall,
Of Chevy Chase, and English Mall,
Fair Rosamond, and Robin Hood,
The little Children in the Wood,
Enlarged in picture, size, and letter,
And painted, lookt abundance better,
And now the heraldry describe
Of a churchwarden, or a tribe.
A bedstead of the antique mode,
Composed of timber many a load,
Such as our grandfathers did use,
Was metamorphos'd into pews;
Which yet their former virtue keep
By lodging folk disposed to sleep.

RHYME a a *

  The cottage, with such feats as these,
Grown to a church by just degrees,
The holy men desired their host
To ask for what he fancied most.
Philemon, having paused a while,
Replied in complimental style:
"Your goodness, more than my desert,
Makes you take all things in good part:
You've raised a church here in a minute,
And I would fain continue in it;
I'm good for little at my days,
Make me the parson if you please."

RHYME a a *

  He spoke, and presently he feels
His grazier's coat reach down his heels;
The sleeves new border'd with a list,
Widen'd and gather'd at his wrist,
But, being old, continued just
As threadbare, and as full of dust.
A shambling awkward gait he took,
With a demure dejected look,
Talk't of his offerings, tythes, and dues,
Could smoke and drink and read the news,
Or sell a goose at the next town,
Decently hid beneath his gown.
Contriv'd to preach old sermons next,
Chang'd in the preface and the text.
At christ'nings well could act his part,
And had the service all by heart;
Wish'd women might have children fast,
And thought whose sow had farrow'd last;
Against dissenters would repine.
And stood up firm for "right divine;"
Carried it to his equals higher,
But most obedient to the squire.
Found his head fill'd with many a system;
But classic authors,--he ne'er mist 'em.

RHYME a a *

  Thus having furbish'd up a parson,
Dame Baucis next they play'd their farce on.
Instead of homespun coifs, were seen
Good pinners edg'd with colberteen;
Her petticoat, transform'd apace,
Became black satin, flounced with lace.
"Plain Goody" would no longer down,
'Twas "Madam," in her grogram gown.
Philemon was in great surprise,
And hardly could believe his eyes.
Amaz'd to see her look so prim,
And she admir'd as much at him.

RHYME a a *

  Thus happy in their change of life,
Were several years this man and wife:
When on a day, which prov'd their last,
Discoursing o'er old stories past,
They went by chance, amidst their talk,
To the churchyard, to take a walk;
When Baucis hastily cry'd out,
"My dear, I see your forehead sprout!"--
"Sprout;" quoth the man; "what's this you tell us?
I hope you don't believe me jealous!
But yet, methinks, I feel it true,
And really yours is budding too--
Nay,--now I cannot stir my foot;
It feels as if 'twere taking root."

RHYME a a *

  Description would but tire my Muse,
In short, they both were turn'd to yews.
Old Goodman Dobson of the Green
Remembers he the trees has seen;
He'll talk of them from noon till night,
And goes with folk to show the sight;
On Sundays, after evening prayer,
He gathers all the parish there;
Points out the place of either yew,
Here Baucis, there Philemon, grew:
Till once a parson of our town,
To mend his barn, cut Baucis down;
At which, 'tis hard to be believ'd
How much the other tree was griev'd,
Grew scrubby, dy'd a-top, was stunted,
So the next parson stubb'd and burnt it.

RHYME a a *

In ancient times, as story tells,
The saints would often leave their cells,
And stroll about, but hide their quality,
To try good people's hospitality.

RHYME a a *

  It happen'd on a winter night,
As authors of the legend write,
Two brother hermits, saints by trade,
Taking their tour in masquerade,
Disguis'd in tatter'd habits, went
To a small village down in Kent;
Where, in the strollers' canting strain,
They begg'd from door to door in vain,
Try'd ev'ry tone might pity win;
But not a soul would let them in.

RHYME a a *

  Our wand'ring saints, in woful state,
Treated at this ungodly rate,
Having thro' all the village past,
To a small cottage came at last
Where dwelt a good old honest ye'man,
Call'd in the neighbourhood Philemon;
Who kindly did these saints invite
In his poor hut to pass the night;
And then the hospitable sire
Bid Goody Baucis mend the fire;
While he from out the chimney took
A flitch of bacon off the hook,
And freely from the fattest side
Cut out large slices to be fry'd;
Then stepp'd aside to fetch 'em drink,
Fill'd a large jug up to the brink,
And saw it fairly twice go round;
Yet (what was wonderful) they found
'Twas still replenished to the top,
As if they ne'er had touch'd a drop.
The good old couple were amaz'd,
And often on each other gaz'd;
For both were frighten'd to the heart,
And just began to cry, "What _art_!"
Then softly turn'd aside, to view
Whether the lights were burning blue.
The gentle pilgrims, soon aware on't,
Told them their calling and their errand:
"Good folk, you need not be afraid,
We are but saints," the hermits said;
"No hurt shall come to you or yours:
But for that pack of churlish boors,
Not fit to live on Christian ground,
They and their houses shall be drown'd;
While you shall see your cottage rise,
And grow a church before your eyes."

RHYME a a *

  They scarce had spoke, when fair and soft,
The roof began to mount aloft;
Aloft rose ev'ry beam and rafter;
The heavy wall climb'd slowly after.
  The chimney widen'd, and grew higher
Became a steeple with a spire.
  The kettle to the top was hoist,
And there stood fasten'd to a joist,
But with the upside down, to show
Its inclination for below:
In vain; for a superior force
Applied at bottom stops its course:
Doom'd ever in suspense to dwell,
'Tis now no kettle, but a bell.

RHYME a a *

  A wooden jack, which had almost
Lost by disuse the art to roast,
A sudden alteration feels,
Increas'd by new intestine wheels;
And, what exalts the wonder more,
The number made the motion slower.
The flyer, though it had leaden feet,
Turn'd round so quick you scarce could see't;
But, slacken'd by some secret power,
Now hardly moves an inch an hour.
The jack and chimney, near ally'd,
Had never left each other's side;
The chimney to a steeple grown,
The jack would not be left alone;
But, up against the steeple rear'd,
Became a clock, and still adher'd;
And still its love to household cares,
By a shrill voice at noon, declares,
Warning the cookmaid not to burn
That roast meat, which it cannot turn.
The groaning-chair began to crawl,
Like an huge snail, half up the wall;
There stuck aloft in public view,
And with small change, a pulpit grew.

RHYME a a *

  The porringers, that in a row
Hung high, and made a glitt'ring show,
To a less noble substance chang'd,
Were now but leathern buckets rang'd.
  The ballads, pasted on the wall,
Of Joan of France, and English Mall,
Fair Rosamond, and Robin Hood,
The little Children in the Wood,
Now seem'd to look abundance better,
Improved in picture, size, and letter:
And, high in order plac'd, describe
The heraldry of ev'ry tribe.

RHYME a a *

  A bedstead of the antique mode,
Compact of timber many a load,
Such as our ancestors did use,
Was metamorphos'd into pews;
Which still their ancient nature keep
By lodging folk disposed to sleep.
  The cottage, by such feats as these,
Grown to a church by just degrees,
The hermits then desired their host
To ask for what he fancy'd most.
Philemon, having paused a while,
Return'd them thanks in homely style;
Then said, "My house is grown so fine,
Methinks, I still would call it mine.
I'm old, and fain would live at ease;
Make me the parson if you please."

RHYME a a *

  He spoke, and presently he feels
His grazier's coat fall down his heels:
He sees, yet hardly can believe,
About each arm a pudding sleeve;
His waistcoat to a cassock grew,
And both assumed a sable hue;
But, being old, continued just
As threadbare, and as full of dust.
His talk was now of tithes and dues:
Could smoke his pipe, and read the news;
Knew how to preach old sermons next,
Vamp'd in the preface and the text;
At christ'nings well could act his part,
And had the service all by heart;
Wish'd women might have children fast,
And thought whose sow had farrow'd last;
Against dissenters would repine,
And stood up firm for "right divine;"
Found his head fill'd with many a system;
But classic authors,--he ne'er mist 'em.

RHYME a a *

  Thus having furbish'd up a parson,
Dame Baucis next they play'd their farce on.
Instead of homespun coifs, were seen
Good pinners edg'd with colberteen;
Her petticoat, transform'd apace,
Became black satin, flounced with lace.
"Plain Goody" would no longer down,
'Twas "Madam," in her grogram gown.
Philemon was in great surprise,
And hardly could believe his eyes.
Amaz'd to see her look so prim,
And she admir'd as much at him.
  Thus happy in their change of life,
Were several years this man and wife:
When on a day, which prov'd their last,
Discoursing o'er old stories past,
They went by chance, amidst their talk,
To the churchyard to take a walk;
When Baucis hastily cry'd out,
"My dear, I see your forehead sprout!"--
"Sprout;" quoth the man; "what's this you tell us?
I hope you don't believe me jealous!

RHYME a a *

But yet, methinks, I feel it true,
And really yours is budding too
--Nay,--now I cannot stir my foot;
It feels as if 'twere taking root."
  Description would but tire my Muse,
In short, they both were turn'd to yews.
Old Goodman Dobson of the Green
Remembers he the trees has seen;
He'll talk of them from noon till night,
And goes with folk to show the sight;
On Sundays, after evening prayer,
He gathers all the parish there;

RHYME a a *

Points out the place of either yew,
Here Baucis, there Philemon, grew:
Till once a parson of our town,
To mend his barn, cut Baucis down;
At which, 'tis hard to be believ'd
How much the other tree was griev'd,
Grew scrubby, dy'd a-top, was stunted,
So the next parson stubb'd and burnt it.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

When Mother Cludd had rose from play,
And call'd to take the cards away,
Van saw, but seem'd not to regard,
How Miss pick'd every painted card,
And, busy both with hand and eye,
Soon rear'd a house two stories high.
Van's genius, without thought or lecture
Is hugely turn'd to architecture:
He view'd the edifice, and smiled,
Vow'd it was pretty for a child:
It was so perfect in its kind,
He kept the model in his mind.

RHYME a a *

  But, when he found the boys at play
And saw them dabbling in their clay,
He stood behind a stall to lurk,
And mark the progress of their work;
With true delight observed them all
Raking up mud to build a wall.
The plan he much admired, and took
The model in his table-book:
Thought himself now exactly skill'd,
And so resolved a house to build:
A real house, with rooms and stairs,
Five times at least as big as theirs;
Taller than Miss's by two yards;
Not a sham thing of play or cards:
And so he did; for, in a while,
He built up such a monstrous pile,
That no two chairmen could be found
Able to lift it from the ground.
Still at Whitehall it stands in view,
Just in the place where first it grew;
There all the little schoolboys run,
Envying to see themselves outdone.

RHYME a a *

  From such deep rudiments as these,
Van is become, by due degrees,
For building famed, and justly reckon'd,
At court, Vitruvius the Second:
No wonder, since wise authors show,
That best foundations must be low:
And now the duke has wisely ta'en him
To be his architect at Blenheim.
  But raillery at once apart,
If this rule holds in every art;
Or if his grace were no more skill'd in
The art of battering walls than building,
We might expect to see next year
A mouse-trap man chief engineer.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Well; 'tis as Bickerstaff has guest,
Though we all took it for a jest:
Partridge is dead; nay more, he dy'd,
Ere he could prove the good 'squire ly'd.
Strange, an astrologer should die
Without one wonder in the sky;
Not one of all his crony stars
To pay their duty at his hearse!
No meteor, no eclipse appear'd!
No comet with a flaming beard!
The sun hath rose and gone to bed,
Just as if Partridge were not dead;
Nor hid himself behind the moon
To make a dreadful night at noon.
He at fit periods walks through Aries,
Howe'er our earthly motion varies;
And twice a-year he'll cut th' Equator,
As if there had been no such matter.
  Some wits have wonder'd what analogy
There is 'twixt cobbling and astrology;
How Partridge made his optics rise
From a shoe-sole to reach the skies.

RHYME a a *

  A list the cobbler's temples ties,
To keep the hair out of his eyes;
From whence 'tis plain the diadem
That princes wear derives from them;
And therefore crowns are now-a-days
Adorn'd with golden stars and rays;
Which plainly shows the near alliance
'Twixt cobbling and the planet's science.
  Besides, that slow-paced sign Böötes,
As 'tis miscall'd, we know not who 'tis;
But Partridge ended all disputes;
He knew his trade, and call'd it _boots_.
  The horned moon, which heretofore
Upon their shoes the Romans wore,
Whose wideness kept their toes from corns,
And whence we claim our shoeing-horns,
Shows how the art of cobbling bears
A near resemblance to the spheres.
A scrap of parchment hung by geometry,
(A great refiner in barometry,)
Can, like the stars, foretell the weather;
And what is parchment else but leather?
Which an astrologer might use
Either for almanacks or shoes.

RHYME a a *

  Thus Partridge, by his wit and parts,
At once did practise both these arts:
And as the boding owl (or rather
The bat, because her wings are leather)
Steals from her private cell by night,
And flies about the candle-light;
So learned Partridge could as well
Creep in the dark from leathern cell,
And in his fancy fly as far
To peep upon a twinkling star.
  Besides, he could confound the spheres,
And set the planets by the ears;
To show his skill, he Mars could join
To Venus in aspect malign;
Then call in Mercury for aid,
And cure the wounds that Venus made.
  Great scholars have in Lucian read,
When Philip King of Greece was dead
His soul and spirit did divide,
And each part took a different side;
One rose a star; the other fell
Beneath, and mended shoes in Hell.

RHYME a a *

  Thus Partridge still shines in each art,
The cobbling and star-gazing part,
And is install'd as good a star
As any of the Caesars are.
  Triumphant star! some pity show
On cobblers militant below,
Whom roguish boys, in stormy nights,
Torment by pissing out their lights,
Or through a chink convey their smoke,
Enclosed artificers to choke.
  Thou, high exalted in thy sphere,
May'st follow still thy calling there.
To thee the Bull will lend his hide,
By Phoebus newly tann'd and dry'd;
For thee they Argo's hulk will tax,
And scrape her pitchy sides for wax:
Then Ariadne kindly lends
Her braided hair to make thee ends;
The points of Sagittarius' dart
Turns to an awl by heavenly art;
And Vulcan, wheedled by his wife,
Will forge for thee a paring-knife.
For want of room by Virgo's side,
She'll strain a point, and sit astride,
To take thee kindly in between;
And then the Signs will be Thirteen.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Here, five feet deep, lies on his back
A cobbler, starmonger, and quack;
Who to the stars, in pure good will,
Does to his best look upward still.
Weep, all you customers that use
His pills, his almanacks, or shoes;
And you that did your fortunes seek,
Step to his grave but once a-week;
This earth, which bears his body's print,
You'll find has so much virtue in't,
That I durst pawn my ears, 'twill tell
Whate'er concerns you full as well,
In physic, stolen goods, or love,
As he himself could, when above.

RHYME a a *

Now hardly here and there an hackney-coach
Appearing, show'd the ruddy morn's approach.
Now Betty from her master's bed had flown,
And softly stole to discompose her own;
The slip-shod 'prentice from his master's door
Had pared the dirt, and sprinkled round the floor.
Now Moll had whirl'd her mop with dext'rous airs,
Prepared to scrub the entry and the stairs.
The youth with broomy stumps began to trace
The kennel's edge, where wheels had worn the place.
The small-coal man was heard with cadence deep,
Till drown'd in shriller notes of chimney-sweep:
Duns at his lordship's gate began to meet;
And brickdust Moll had scream'd through half the street.
The turnkey now his flock returning sees,
Duly let out a-nights to steal for fees:
The watchful bailiffs take their silent stands,
And schoolboys lag with satchels in their hands.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Careful observers may foretell the hour,
(By sure prognostics,) when to dread a shower.
While rain depends, the pensive cat gives o'er
Her frolics, and pursues her tail no more.
Returning home at night, you'll find the sink
Strike your offended sense with double stink.
If you be wise, then, go not far to dine:
You'll spend in coach-hire more than save in wine.
A coming shower your shooting corns presage,
Old a-ches throb, your hollow tooth will rage;
Sauntering in coffeehouse is Dulman seen;
He damns the climate, and complains of spleen.
Meanwhile the South, rising with dabbled wings,
A sable cloud athwart the welkin flings,
That swill'd more liquor than it could contain,
And, like a drunkard, gives it up again.
Brisk Susan whips her linen from the rope,
While the first drizzling shower is borne aslope;
Such is that sprinkling which some careless quean
Flirts on you from her mop, but not so clean:
You fly, invoke the gods; then, turning, stop
To rail; she singing, still whirls on her mop.
Not yet the dust had shunn'd the unequal strife,
But, aided by the wind, fought still for life,
And wafted with its foe by violent gust,
'Twas doubtful which was rain, and which was dust.
Ah! where must needy poet seek for aid,
When dust and rain at once his coat invade?
Sole coat! where dust, cemented by the rain,
Erects the nap, and leaves a cloudy stain!
Now in contiguous drops the flood comes down,
Threatening with deluge this _devoted_ town.
To shops in crowds the daggled females fly,
Pretend to cheapen goods, but nothing buy.
The Templar spruce, while every spout's abroach,
Stays till 'tis fair, yet seems to call a coach.
The tuck'd-up sempstress walks with hasty strides,
While streams run down her oil'd umbrella's sides.
Here various kinds, by various fortunes led,
Commence acquaintance underneath a shed.
Triumphant Tories, and desponding Whigs,
Forget their feuds, and join to save their wigs.
Box'd in a chair the beau impatient sits,
While spouts run clattering o'er the roof by fits,
And ever and anon with frightful din
The leather sounds; he trembles from within.
So when Troy chairmen bore the wooden steed,
Pregnant with Greeks impatient to be freed,
(Those bully Greeks, who, as the moderns do,
Instead of paying chairmen, ran them through,)
Laocoon struck the outside with his spear,
And each imprison'd hero quaked for fear.
  Now from all parts the swelling kennels flow,
And bear their trophies with them as they go:
Filth of all hues and odour, seem to tell
What street they sail'd from, by their sight and smell.
They, as each torrent drives with rapid force,
From Smithfield to St. Pulchre's shape their course,
And in huge confluence join'd at Snowhill ridge,
Fall from the conduit prone to Holborn bridge.

RHYME a a a 

Sweeping from butchers' stalls, dung, guts, and blood,
Drown'd puppies, stinking sprats, all drench'd in mud,
Dead cats, and turnip-tops, come tumbling down the flood.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Whoever pleases to inquire
Why yonder steeple wants a spire,
The grey old fellow, Poet Joe,
The philosophic cause will show.
Once on a time a western blast,
At least twelve inches overcast,
Reckoning roof, weathercock, and all,
Which came with a prodigious fall;
And, tumbling topsy-turvy round,
Lit with its bottom on the ground:
For, by the laws of gravitation,
It fell into its proper station.
  This is the little strutting pile
You see just by the churchyard stile;
The walls in tumbling gave a knock,
And thus the steeple got a shock;
From whence the neighbouring farmer calls
The steeple, Knock; the vicar, Walls.

RHYME a a *

  The vicar once a-week creeps in,
Sits with his knees up to his chin;
Here cons his notes, and takes a whet,
Till the small ragged flock is met.
  A traveller, who by did pass,
Observed the roof behind the grass;
On tiptoe stood, and rear'd his snout,
And saw the parson creeping out:
Was much surprised to see a crow
Venture to build his nest so low.
  A schoolboy ran unto't, and thought
The crib was down, the blackbird caught.
A third, who lost his way by night,
Was forced for safety to alight,
And, stepping o'er the fabric roof,
His horse had like to spoil his hoof.
  Warburton took it in his noddle,
This building was design'd a model;
Or of a pigeon-house or oven,
To bake one loaf, or keep one dove in.

RHYME a a *

  Then Mrs. Johnson gave her verdict,
And every one was pleased that heard it;
All that you make this stir about
Is but a still which wants a spout.
The reverend Dr. Raymond guess'd
More probably than all the rest;
He said, but that it wanted room,
It might have been a pigmy's tomb.
  The doctor's family came by,
And little miss began to cry,
Give me that house in my own hand!
Then madam bade the chariot stand,
Call'd to the clerk, in manner mild,
Pray, reach that thing here to the child:
That thing, I mean, among the kale;
And here's to buy a pot of ale.

RHYME a a *

  The clerk said to her in a heat,
What! sell my master's country seat,
Where he comes every week from town!
He would not sell it for a crown.
Poh! fellow, keep not such a pother;
In half an hour thou'lt make another.
  Says Nancy, I can make for miss
A finer house ten times than this;
The dean will give me willow sticks,
And Joe my apron-full of bricks.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Now the keen rigour of the winter's o'er,
No hail descends, and frost can pinch no more,
While other girls confess the genial spring,
And laugh aloud, or amorous ditties sing,
Secure from cold, their lovely necks display,
And throw each useless chafing-dish away;
Why sits my Phillis discontented here,
Nor feels the turn of the revolving year?
Why on that brow dwell sorrow and dismay,
Where Loves were wont to sport, and Smiles to play?

RHYME a a b b b c c d d 

Ah, Corydon! survey the 'Change around,
Through all the 'Change no wretch like me is found:
Alas! the day, when I, poor heedless maid,
Was to your rooms in Lincoln's Inn betray'd;
Then how you swore, how many vows you made!
Ye listening Zephyrs, that o'erheard his love,
Waft the soft accents to the gods above.
Alas! the day; for (O, eternal shame!)
I sold you handkerchiefs, and lost my fame.

RHYME a a b b c c d d 

When I forget the favour you bestow'd,
Red herrings shall be spawn'd in Tyburn Road:
Fleet Street, transform'd, become a flowery green,
And mass be sung where operas are seen.
The wealthy cit, and the St. James's beau,
Shall change their quarters, and their joys forego;
Stock-jobbing, this to Jonathan's shall come,
At the Groom Porter's, that play off his plum.

RHYME a a a b b c c d d e e 

But what to me does all that love avail,
If, while I doze at home o'er porter's ale,
Each night with wine and wenches you regale?
My livelong hours in anxious cares are past,
And raging hunger lays my beauty waste.
On templars spruce in vain I glances throw,
And with shrill voice invite them as they go.
Exposed in vain my glossy ribbons shine,
And unregarded wave upon the twine.
The week flies round, and when my profit's known,
I hardly clear enough to change a crown.

RHYME a a b b c c d d 

Hard fate of virtue, thus to be distrest,
Thou fairest of thy trade, and far the best;
As fruitmen's stalls the summer market grace,
And ruddy peaches them; as first in place
Plumcake is seen o'er smaller pastry ware,
And ice on that: so Phillis does appear
In playhouse and in Park, above the rest
Of belles mechanic, elegantly drest.

RHYME a a *

And yet Crepundia, that conceited fair,
Amid her toys, affects a saucy air,
And views me hourly with a scornful eye.
She might as well with bright Cleora vie.

RHYME a a *

With this large petticoat I strive in vain
To hide my folly past, and coming pain;
'Tis now no secret; she, and fifty more,
Observe the symptoms I had once before:
A second babe at Wapping must be placed,
When I scarce bear the charges of the last.

RHYME a a *

What I could raise I sent; a pound of plums,
Five shillings, and a coral for his gums;
To-morrow I intend him something more.
I sent a frock and pair of shoes before.

RHYME a a *

However, you shall home with me to-night,
Forget your cares, and revel in delight,
I have in store a pint or two of wine,
Some cracknels, and the remnant of a chine.

RHYME a a *

  And now on either side, and all around,
The weighty shop-boards fall, and bars resound;
Each ready sempstress slips her pattens on,
And ties her hood, preparing to be gone.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

My pretty dear Cuz, tho' I've roved the town o'er,
To dispatch in an hour some visits a score;
Though, since first on the wheels, I've been every day
At the 'Change, at a raffling, at church, or a play;
And the fops of the town are pleased with the notion
Of calling your slave the perpetual motion;--
Though oft at your door I have whined [out] my love
As my Knight does grin his at your Lady above;
Yet, ne'er before this, though I used all my care,
I e'er was so happy to meet my dear Chair;
And since we're so near, like birds of a feather,
Let's e'en, as they say, set our horses together.

RHYME a a *

By your awkward address, you're that thing which should carry,
With one footman behind, our lover Sir Harry.
By your language, I judge, you think me a wench;
He that makes love to me, must make it in French.
Thou that's drawn by two beasts, and carry'st a brute,
Canst thou vainly e'er hope, I'll answer thy suit?
Though sometimes you pretend to appear with your six,
No regard to their colour, their sexes you mix:
Then on the grand-paw you'd look very great,
With your new-fashion'd glasses, and nasty old seat.
Thus a beau I have seen strut with a cock'd hat,
And newly rigg'd out, with a dirty cravat.
You may think that you make a figure most shining,
But it's plain that you have an old cloak for a lining.
Are those double-gilt nails? Where's the lustre of Kerry,
To set off the Knight, and to finish the Jerry?
If you hope I'll be kind, you must tell me what's due
In George's-lane for you, ere I'll buckle to.

RHYME a a *

Why, how now, Doll Diamond, you're very alert;
Is it your French breeding has made you so pert?
Because I was civil, here's a stir with a pox:
Who is it that values your ---- or your fox?
Sure 'tis to her honour, he ever should bed
His bloody red hand to her bloody red head.
You're proud of your gilding; but I tell you each nail
Is only just tinged with a rub at her tail;
And although it may pass for gold on a ninny,
Sure we know a Bath shilling soon from a guinea.
Nay, her foretop's a cheat; each morn she does black it,
Yet, ere it be night, it's the same with her placket.
I'll ne'er be run down any more with your cant;
Your velvet was wore before in a mant,
On the back of her mother; but now 'tis much duller,--
The fire she carries hath changed its colour.
Those creatures that draw me you never would mind,
If you'd but look on your own Pharaoh's lean kine;

RHYME a a *

They're taken for spectres, they're so meagre and spare,
Drawn damnably low by your sorrel mare.
We know how your lady was on you befriended;
You're not to be paid for 'till the lawsuit is ended:
But her bond it is good, he need not to doubt;
She is two or three years above being out.
Could my Knight be advised, he should ne'er spend his vigour
On one he can't hope of e'er making _bigger_.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Among the numbers who employ
Their tongues and pens to give you joy,
Dear Harley! generous youth, admit
What friendship dictates more than wit.
Forgive me, when I fondly thought
(By frequent observations taught)
A spirit so inform'd as yours
Could never prosper in amours.
The God of Wit, and Light, and Arts,
With all acquired and natural parts,
Whose harp could savage beasts enchant,
Was an unfortunate gallant.
Had Bacchus after Daphne reel'd,
The nymph had soon been brought to yield;
Or, had embroider'd Mars pursued,
The nymph would ne'er have been a prude.
Ten thousand footsteps, full in view,
Mark out the way where Daphne flew;
For such is all the sex's flight,
They fly from learning, wit, and light;
They fly, and none can overtake
But some gay coxcomb, or a rake.
  How then, dear Harley, could I guess
That you should meet, in love, success?
For, if those ancient tales be true,
Phoebus was beautiful as you;
Yet Daphne never slack'd her pace,
For wit and learning spoil'd his face.
And since the same resemblance held
In gifts wherein you both excell'd,
I fancied every nymph would run
From you, as from Latona's son.
Then where, said I, shall Harley find
A virgin of superior mind,
With wit and virtue to discover,
And pay the merit of her lover?
This character shall Ca'endish claim,
Born to retrieve her sex's fame.
The chief among the glittering crowd,
Of titles, birth, and fortune proud,
(As fools are insolent and vain)
Madly aspired to wear her chain;
But Pallas, guardian of the maid,
Descending to her charge's aid,
Held out Medusa's snaky locks,
Which stupified them all to stocks.
The nymph with indignation view'd
The dull, the noisy, and the lewd;
For Pallas, with celestial light,
Had purified her mortal sight;
Show'd her the virtues all combined,
Fresh blooming, in young Harley's mind.

RHYME a a *

  Terrestrial nymphs, by formal arts,
Display their various nets for hearts:
Their looks are all by method set,
When to be prude, and when coquette;
Yet, wanting skill and power to chuse,
Their only pride is to refuse.
But, when a goddess would bestow
Her love on some bright youth below,
Round all the earth she casts her eyes;
And then, descending from the skies,
Makes choice of him she fancies best,
And bids the ravish'd youth be bless'd.
Thus the bright empress of the morn
Chose for her spouse a mortal born:
The goddess made advances first;
Else what aspiring hero durst?
Though, like a virgin of fifteen,
She blushes when by mortals seen;
Still blushes, and with speed retires,
When Sol pursues her with his fires.
  Diana thus, Heaven's chastest queen
Struck with Endymion's graceful mien
Down from her silver chariot came,
And to the shepherd own'd her flame.
  Thus Ca'endish, as Aurora bright,
And chaster than the Queen of Night
Descended from her sphere to find
A mortal of superior kind.

RHYME a a *

Desponding Phyllis was endu'd
With ev'ry talent of a prude:
She trembled when a man drew near;
Salute her, and she turn'd her ear:
If o'er against her you were placed,
She durst not look above your waist:
She'd rather take you to her bed,
Than let you see her dress her head;
In church you hear her, thro' the crowd,
Repeat the absolution loud:
In church, secure behind her fan,
She durst behold that monster man:
There practis'd how to place her head,
And bite her lips to make them red;
Or, on the mat devoutly kneeling,
Would lift her eyes up to the ceiling.
And heave her bosom unaware,
For neighb'ring beaux to see it bare.

RHYME a a *

  At length a lucky lover came,
And found admittance to the dame,
Suppose all parties now agreed,
The writings drawn, the lawyer feed,
The vicar and the ring bespoke:
Guess, how could such a match be broke?
See then what mortals place their bliss in!
Next morn betimes the bride was missing:
The mother scream'd, the father chid;
Where can this idle wench be hid?
No news of Phyl! the bridegroom came,
And thought his bride had skulk'd for shame;
Because her father used to say,
The girl had such a bashful way!
  Now John the butler must be sent
To learn the road that Phyllis went:
The groom was wish'd to saddle Crop;
For John must neither light nor stop,
But find her, wheresoe'er she fled,
And bring her back alive or dead.

RHYME a a *

  See here again the devil to do!
For truly John was missing too:
The horse and pillion both were gone!
Phyllis, it seems, was fled with John.
  Old Madam, who went up to find
What papers Phyl had left behind,
A letter on the toilet sees,
"To my much honour'd father--these--"
('Tis always done, romances tell us,
When daughters run away with fellows,)
Fill'd with the choicest common-places,
By others used in the like cases.
"That long ago a fortune-teller
Exactly said what now befell her;
And in a glass had made her see
A serving-man of low degree.
It was her fate, must be forgiven;
For marriages were made in Heaven:
His pardon begg'd: but, to be plain,
She'd do't if 'twere to do again:
Thank'd God, 'twas neither shame nor sin;
For John was come of honest kin.
Love never thinks of rich and poor;
She'd beg with John from door to door.
Forgive her, if it be a crime;
She'll never do't another time.
She ne'er before in all her life
Once disobey'd him, maid nor wife."
One argument she summ'd up all in,
"The thing was done and past recalling;
And therefore hoped she should recover
His favour when his passion's over.
She valued not what others thought her,
And was--his most obedient daughter."
Fair maidens all, attend the Muse,
Who now the wand'ring pair pursues:
Away they rode in homely sort,
Their journey long, their money short;
The loving couple well bemir'd;
The horse and both the riders tir'd:
Their victuals bad, their lodgings worse;
Phyl cried! and John began to curse:
Phyl wish'd that she had strain'd a limb,
When first she ventured out with him;
John wish'd that he had broke a leg,
When first for her he quitted Peg.

RHYME a a *

  But what adventures more befell 'em,
The Muse hath now no time to tell 'em;
How Johnny wheedled, threaten'd, fawn'd,
Till Phyllis all her trinkets pawn'd:
How oft she broke her marriage vows,
In kindness to maintain her spouse,
Till swains unwholesome spoil'd the trade;
For now the surgeon must be paid,
To whom those perquisites are gone,
In Christian justice due to John.
  When food and raiment now grew scarce,
Fate put a period to the farce,
And with exact poetic justice;
For John was landlord, Phyllis hostess;
They keep, at Stains, the Old Blue Boar,
Are cat and dog, and rogue and whore.

RHYME a a *

Virtue conceal'd within our breast
Is inactivity at best:
But never shall the Muse endure
To let your virtues lie obscure;
Or suffer Envy to conceal
Your labours for the public weal.
Within your breast all wisdom lies,
Either to govern or advise;
Your steady soul preserves her frame,
In good and evil times, the same.
Pale Avarice and lurking Fraud,
Stand in your sacred presence awed;
Your hand alone from gold abstains,
Which drags the slavish world in chains.
  Him for a happy man I own,
Whose fortune is not overgrown;
And happy he who wisely knows
To use the gifts that Heaven bestows;
Or, if it please the powers divine,
Can suffer want and not repine.
The man who infamy to shun
Into the arms of death would run;
That man is ready to defend,
With life, his country or his friend.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

To you whose virtues, I must own
With shame, I have too lately known;
To you, by art and nature taught
To be the man I long have sought,
Had not ill Fate, perverse and blind,
Placed you in life too far behind:
Or, what I should repine at more,
Placed me in life too far before:
To you the Muse this verse bestows,
Which might as well have been in prose;
No thought, no fancy, no sublime,
But simple topics told in rhyme.

RHYME a a *

  Three gifts for conversation fit
Are humour, raillery, and wit:
The last, as boundless as the wind,
Is well conceived, though not defined;
For, sure by wit is only meant
Applying what we first invent.
What humour is, not all the tribe
Of logic-mongers can describe;
Here only nature acts her part,
Unhelp'd by practice, books, or art:
For wit and humour differ quite;
That gives surprise, and this delight,
Humour is odd, grotesque, and wild,
Only by affectation spoil'd;
'Tis never by invention got,
Men have it when they know it not.
  Our conversation to refine,
True humour must with wit combine:
From both we learn to rally well,
Wherein French writers most excel;
Voiture, in various lights, displays
That irony which turns to praise:
His genius first found out the rule
For an obliging ridicule:
He flatters with peculiar air
The brave, the witty, and the fair:
And fools would fancy he intends
A satire where he most commends.

RHYME a a *

  But as a poor pretending beau,
Because he fain would make a show,
Nor can afford to buy gold lace,
Takes up with copper in the place:
So the pert dunces of mankind,
Whene'er they would be thought refined,
Because the diff'rence lies abstruse
'Twixt raillery and gross abuse,
To show their parts will scold and rail,
Like porters o'er a pot of ale.
  Such is that clan of boisterous bears,
Always together by the ears;
Shrewd fellows and arch wags, a tribe
That meet for nothing but to gibe;
Who first run one another down,
And then fall foul on all the town;
Skill'd in the horse-laugh and dry rub,
And call'd by excellence The Club.
I mean your butler, Dawson, Car,
All special friends, and always jar.
  The mettled and the vicious steed
Do not more differ in their breed,
Nay, Voiture is as like Tom Leigh,
As rudeness is to repartee.

RHYME a a *

  If what you said I wish unspoke,
'Twill not suffice it was a joke:
Reproach not, though in jest, a friend
For those defects he cannot mend;
His lineage, calling, shape, or sense,
If named with scorn, gives just offence.
  What use in life to make men fret,
Part in worse humour than they met?
Thus all society is lost,
Men laugh at one another's cost:
And half the company is teazed
That came together to be pleased:
For all buffoons have most in view
To please themselves by vexing you.
  When jests are carried on too far,
And the loud laugh begins the war,
You keep your countenance for shame,
Yet still you think your friend to blame;
For though men cry they love a jest,
'Tis but when others stand the test;
And (would you have their meaning known)
They love a jest when 'tis their own.

RHYME a a *

  You wonder now to see me write
So gravely where the subject's light;
Some part of what I here design
Regards a friend  of yours and mine;
Who full of humour, fire, and wit,
Not always judges what is fit,
But loves to take prodigious rounds,
And sometimes walks beyond his bounds,
You must, although the point be nice,
Venture to give him some advice;
Few hints from you will set him right,
And teach him how to be polite.
Bid him like you, observe with care,
Whom to be hard on, whom to spare;
Nor indiscreetly to suppose
All subjects like Dan Jackson's nose.
To study the obliging jest,
By reading those who teach it best;
For prose I recommend Voiture's,
For verse (I speak my judgment) yours.
He'll find the secret out from thence,
To rhyme all day without offence;
And I no more shall then accuse
The flirts of his ill-manner'd Muse.
  If he be guilty, you must mend him;
  If he be innocent, defend him.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Know all men by these presents, Death, the tamer,
By mortgage has secured the corpse of Demar;
Nor can four hundred thousand sterling pound
Redeem him from his prison underground.
His heirs might well, of all his wealth possesst
Bestow, to bury him, one iron chest.
Plutus, the god of wealth, will joy to know
His faithful steward in the shades below.
He walk'd the streets, and wore a threadbare cloak;
He din'd and supp'd at charge of other folk:
And by his looks, had he held out his palms,
He might be thought an object fit for alms.
So, to the poor if he refus'd his pelf,
He us'd 'em full as kindly as himself.
  Where'er he went, he never saw his betters;
Lords, knights, and squires, were all his humble debtors;
And under hand and seal, the Irish nation
Were forc'd to own to him their obligation.

RHYME a a *

  He that cou'd once have half a kingdom bought,
In half a minute is not worth a groat.
His coffers from the coffin could not save,
Nor all his int'rest keep him from the grave.
A golden monument would not be right,
Because we wish the earth upon him light.
  Oh London Tavern! thou hast lost a friend,
Tho' in thy walls he ne'er did farthing spend;
He touch'd the pence when others touch'd the pot;
The hand that sign'd the mortgage paid the shot.
  Old as he was, no vulgar known disease
On him could ever boast a pow'r to seize;
"But as the gold he weigh'd, grim death in spight
Cast in his dart, which made three moidores light;
And, as he saw his darling money fail,
Blew his last breath to sink the lighter scale."
He who so long was current, 'twould be strange
If he should now be cry'd down since his change.
  The sexton shall green sods on thee bestow;
Alas, the sexton is thy banker now!
A dismal banker must that banker be,
Who gives no bills but of mortality!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Beneath this verdant hillock lies
Demar, the wealthy and the wise,
His heirs, that he might safely rest,
Have put his carcass in a chest;
The very chest in which, they say,
His other self, his money, lay.
And, if his heirs continue kind
To that dear self he left behind,
I dare believe, that four in five
Will think his better self alive.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

You always are making a god of your spouse;
But this neither Reason nor Conscience allows;
Perhaps you will say, 'tis in gratitude due,
And you adore him, because he adores you.
Your argument's weak, and so you will find;
For you, by this rule, must adore all mankind.

RHYME a a *

Are the guests of this house still doom'd to be cheated?
Sure the Fates have decreed they by halves should be treated.
In the days of good John if you came here to dine,
You had choice of good meat, but no choice of good wine.
In Jonathan's reign, if you come here to eat,
You have choice of good wine, but no choice of good meat.
O Jove! then how fully might all sides be blest,
Wouldst thou but agree to this humble request!
Put both deans in one; or, if that's too much trouble,
Instead of the deans, make the deanery double.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

A bard, on whom Phoebus his spirit bestow'd,
Resolving t'acknowledge the bounty he owed,
Found out a new method at once of confessing,
And making the most of so mighty a blessing:
To the God he'd be grateful; but mortals he'd chouse,
By making his patron preside in his house;
And wisely foresaw this advantage from thence,
That the God would in honour bear most of th'expense;
So the bard he finds drink, and leaves Phoebus to treat
With the thoughts he inspires, regardless of meat.
Hence they that come hither expecting to dine,
Are always fobb'd off with sheer wit and sheer wine.

RHYME a a *

Right Trusty, and so forth--we let you know
We are very ill used by you mortals below.
For, first, I have often by chemists been told,
(Though I know nothing on't,) it is I that make gold;
Which when you have got, you so carefully hide it,
That, since I was born, I hardly have spied it.
Then it must be allow'd, that, whenever I shine,
I forward the grass, and I ripen the vine;
To me the good fellows apply for relief,
Without whom they could get neither claret nor beef:
Yet their wine and their victuals, those curmudgeon lubbards
Lock up from my sight in cellars and cupboards.
That I have an ill eye, they wickedly think,
And taint all their meat, and sour all their drink.
But, thirdly and lastly, it must be allow'd,
I alone can inspire the poetical crowd:
This is gratefully own'd by each boy in the College,
Whom, if I inspire, it is not to my knowledge.
This every pretender in rhyme will admit,
Without troubling his head about judgment or wit.
These gentlemen use me with kindness and freedom,
And as for their works, when I please I may read 'em.
They lie open on purpose on counters and stalls,
And the titles I view, when I shine on the walls.

RHYME a a *

  But a comrade of yours, that traitor Delany,
Whom I for your sake have used better than any,
And, of my mere motion, and special good grace,
Intended in time to succeed in your place,
On Tuesday the tenth, seditiously came,
With a certain false trait'ress, one Stella by name,
To the Deanery-house, and on the North glass,
Where for fear of the cold I never can pass,
Then and there, vi et armis, with a certain utensil,
Of value five shillings, in English a pencil,
Did maliciously, falsely, and trait'rously write,
While Stella, aforesaid, stood by with a light.
My sister hath lately deposed upon oath,
That she stopt in her course to look at them both;
That Stella was helping, abetting, and aiding;
And still as he writ, stood smiling and reading:
That her eyes were as bright as myself at noon-day,
But her graceful black locks were all mingled with grey:
And by the description, I certainly know,
'Tis the nymph that I courted some ten years ago;
Whom when I with the best of my talents endued,
On her promise of yielding, she acted the prude:
That some verses were writ with felonious intent,
Direct to the North, where I never once went:
That the letters appear'd reversed through the pane,
But in Stella's bright eyes were placed right again;
Wherein she distinctly could read ev'ry line,
And presently guessed the fancy was mine.
She can swear to the Parson whom oft she has seen
At night between Cavan Street and College Green.
  Now you see why his verses so seldom are shown,
The reason is plain, they are none of his own;
And observe while you live that no man is shy
To discover the goods he came honestly by.
If I light on a thought, he will certainly steal it,
And when he has got it, find ways to conceal it.
Of all the fine things he keeps in the dark,
There's scarce one in ten but what has my mark;
And let them be seen by the world if he dare,
I'll make it appear they are all stolen ware.
But as for the poem he writ on your sash,
I think I have now got him under my lash;
My sister transcribed it last night to his sorrow,
And the public shall see't, if I live till to-morrow.
Thro' the zodiac around, it shall quickly be spread
In all parts of the globe where your language is read.

RHYME a a *

  He knows very well, I ne'er gave a refusal,
When he ask'd for my aid in the forms that are usual:
But the secret is this; I did lately intend
To write a few verses on you as my friend:
I studied a fortnight, before I could find,
As I rode in my chariot, a thought to my mind,
And resolved the next winter (for that is my time,
When the days are at shortest) to get it in rhyme;
Till then it was lock'd in my box at Parnassus;
When that subtle companion, in hopes to surpass us,
Conveys out my paper of hints by a trick
(For I think in my conscience he deals with old Nick,)
And from my own stock provided with topics,
He gets to a window beyond both the tropics,
There out of my sight, just against the north zone,
Writes down my conceits, and then calls them his own;
And you, like a cully, the bubble can swallow:
Now who but Delany that writes like Apollo?
High treason by statute! yet here you object,
He only stole hints, but the verse is correct;
Though the thought be Apollo's, 'tis finely express'd;
So a thief steals my horse, and has him well dress'd.
Now whereas the said criminal seems past repentance,
We Phoebus think fit to proceed to his sentence.
Since Delany hath dared, like Prometheus his sire,
To climb to our region, and thence to steal fire;
We order a vulture in shape of the Spleen,
To prey on his liver, but not to be seen.
And we order our subjects of every degree
To believe all his verses were written by me:
And under the pain of our highest displeasure,
To call nothing his but the rhyme and the measure.
And, lastly, for Stella, just out of her prime,
I'm too much revenged already by Time,
In return of her scorn, I sent her diseases,
But will now be her friend whenever she pleases.
And the gifts I bestow'd her will find her a lover
Though she lives till she's grey as a badger all over.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Parnassus, February the twenty-seventh.
The poets assembled here on the eleventh,
Convened by Apollo, who gave them to know
He'd have a vicegerent in his empire below;
But declared that no bard should this honour inherit,
Till the rest had agreed he surpass'd them in merit:
Now this, you'll allow, was a difficult case,
For each bard believed he'd a right to the place;
So, finding the assembly grow warm in debate,
He put them in mind of his Phaethon's fate:
'Twas urged to no purpose; disputes higher rose,
Scarce Phoebus himself could their quarrels compose;
Till at length he determined that every bard
Should (each in his turn) be patiently heard.
  First, one who believed he excell'd in translation,
Founds his claim on the doctrine of man's transmigration:
"Since the soul of great Milton was given to me,
I hope the convention will quickly agree."--
"Agree;" quoth Apollo: "from whence is this fool?
Is he just come from reading Pythagoras at school?
Begone, sir, you've got your subscriptions in time,
And given in return neither reason nor rhyme."
To the next says the God, "Though now I won't chuse you,
I'll tell you the reason for which I refuse you:
Love's Goddess has oft to her parents complain'd,
Of my favouring a bard who her empire disdain'd;
That at my instigation, a poem you writ,
Which to beauty and youth preferr'd judgment and wit;
That, to make you a Laureate, I gave the first voice,
Inspiring the Britons t'approve of my choice.
Jove sent her to me, her power to try;
The Goddess of Beauty what God can deny?
She forbids your preferment; I grant her desire.
Appease the fair Goddess: you then may rise higher."
  The next that appear'd had good hopes of succeeding,
For he merited much for his wit and his breeding.
'Twas wise in the Britons no favour to show him,
He else might expect they should pay what they owe him.
And therefore they prudently chose to discard
The Patriot, whose merits they would not reward:
The God, with a smile, bade his favourite advance,
"You were sent by Astraea her envoy to France:
You bend your ambition to rise in the state;
I refuse you, because you could stoop to be great."
  Then a bard who had been a successful translator,
"The convention allows me a versificator."
Says Apollo, "You mention the least of your merit;
By your works, it appears you have much of my spirit.
I esteem you so well, that, to tell you the truth,
The greatest objection against you's your youth;
Then be not concern'd you are now laid aside;
If you live you shall certainly one day preside."
  Another, low bending, Apollo thus greets,
"'Twas I taught your subjects to walk through the streets."
  You taught them to walk! why, they knew it before;
But give me the bard that can teach them to soar.
Whenever he claims, 'tis his right, I'll confess,
Who lately attempted my style with success;
Who writes like Apollo has most of his spirit,
And therefore 'tis just I distinguish his merit:
Who makes it appear, by all he has writ,
His judgment alone can set bounds to his wit;
Like Virgil correct, with his own native ease,
But excels even Virgil in elegant praise:
Who admires the ancients, and knows 'tis their due
Yet writes in a manner entirely new;
Though none with more ease their depths can explore,
Yet whatever he wants he takes from my store;
Though I'm fond of his virtues, his pride I can see,
In scorning to borrow from any but me:
It is owing to this, that, like Cynthia, his lays
Enlighten the world by reflecting my rays.
This said, the whole audience soon found out his drift:
The convention was summon'd in favour of SWIFT.
Ireland is now our royal care,
We lately fix'd our viceroy there.
How near was she to be undone,
Till pious love inspired her son!
What cannot our vicegerent do,
As poet and as patriot too?

RHYME a a a 

Let his success our subjects sway,
Our inspirations to obey,
And follow where he leads the way:

RHYME a a *

Then study to correct your taste;
Nor beaten paths be longer traced.
  No simile shall be begun,
With rising or with setting sun;
And let the secret head of Nile
Be ever banish'd from your isle.
  When wretched lovers live on air,
I beg you'll the chameleon spare;
And when you'd make a hero grander,
Forget he's like a salamander.

RHYME a a a 

  No son of mine shall dare to say,
Aurora usher'd in the day,
Or ever name the milky-way.

RHYME a a *

You all agree, I make no doubt,
Elijah's mantle is worn out.
  The bird of Jove shall toil no more
To teach the humble wren to soar.
Your tragic heroes shall not rant,
Nor shepherds use poetic cant.
Simplicity alone can grace
The manners of the rural race.
Theocritus and Philips be
Your guides to true simplicity.

RHYME a a a 

  When Damon's soul shall take its flight,
Though poets have the second-sight,
They shall not see a trail of light.

RHYME a a *

Nor shall the vapours upwards rise,
Nor a new star adorn the skies:
For who can hope to place one there,
As glorious as Belinda's hair?
Yet, if his name you'd eternize,
And must exalt him to the skies;

RHYME a a *

Without a star this may be done:
So Tickell mourn'd his Addison.
  If Anna's happy reign you praise,
Pray, not a word of halcyon days:
Nor let my votaries show their skill
In aping lines from Cooper's Hill;
For know I cannot bear to hear
The mimicry of "deep, yet clear."
  Whene'er my viceroy is address'd,
Against the phoenix I protest.
When poets soar in youthful strains,
No Phaethon to hold the reins.
  When you describe a lovely girl,
No lips of coral, teeth of pearl.

RHYME a a *

  Cupid shall ne'er mistake another,
However beauteous, for his mother;
Nor shall his darts at random fly
From magazine in Celia's eye.
With woman compounds I am cloy'd,
Which only pleased in Biddy Floyd.
For foreign aid what need they roam,
Whom fate has amply blest at home?
  Unerring Heaven, with bounteous hand,
Has form'd a model for your land,

RHYME a a *

Whom Jove endued with every grace;
The glory of the Granard race;
Now destined by the powers divine
The blessing of another line.
Then, would you paint a matchless dame,
Whom you'd consign to endless fame?
Invoke not Cytherea's aid,
Nor borrow from the blue-eyed maid;
Nor need you on the Graces call;
Take qualities from Donegal.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

O'ROURKE'S noble fare
  Will ne'er be forgot,
By those who were there,
  Or those who were not.

RHYME a b a b 

His revels to keep,
  We sup and we dine
On seven score sheep,
  Fat bullocks, and swine.

RHYME a b a b 

Usquebaugh to our feast
  In pails was brought up,
A hundred at least,
  And a madder our cup.

RHYME a b a b 

O there is the sport!
  We rise with the light
In disorderly sort,
  From snoring all night.

RHYME a b a b 

O how was I trick'd!
  My pipe it was broke,
My pocket was pick'd,
  I lost my new cloak.

RHYME a b a b 

I'm rifled, quoth Nell,
  Of mantle and kercher,
Why then fare them well,
  The de'el take the searcher.

RHYME a b a b 

Come, harper, strike up;
  But, first, by your favour,
Boy, give us a cup:
  Ah! this hath some savour.

RHYME a b a b 

O'Rourke's jolly boys
  Ne'er dreamt of the matter,
Till, roused by the noise,
  And musical clatter,

RHYME a b a b 

They bounce from their nest,
  No longer will tarry,
They rise ready drest,
  Without one Ave-Mary.

RHYME a b a b 

They dance in a round,
  Cutting capers and ramping;
A mercy the ground
  Did not burst with their stamping.

RHYME a b a b 

The floor is all wet
  With leaps and with jumps,
While the water and sweat
  Splish-splash in their pumps.

RHYME a b a b 

Bless you late and early,
  Laughlin O'Enagin!
But, my hand, you dance rarely.
  Margery Grinagin.

RHYME a b a b 

Bring straw for our bed,
  Shake it down to the feet,
Then over us spread
  The winnowing sheet.

RHYME a b a b 

To show I don't flinch,
  Fill the bowl up again:
Then give us a pinch
  Of your sneezing, a Yean.

RHYME a b a b 

Good lord! what a sight,
  After all their good cheer,
For people to fight
  In the midst of their beer!

RHYME a b a b 

They rise from their feast,
  And hot are their brains,
A cubit at least
  The length of their skeans.

RHYME a b a b 

What stabs and what cuts,
  What clattering of sticks;
What strokes on the guts,
  What bastings and kicks!

RHYME a b a b 

With cudgels of oak,
  Well harden'd in flame,
A hundred heads broke,
  A hundred struck lame.

RHYME a b a b 

You churl, I'll maintain
  My father built Lusk,
The castle of Slane,
  And Carrick Drumrusk:

RHYME a b a b 

The Earl of Kildare,
  And Moynalta his brother,
As great as they are,
  I was nurst by their mother.

RHYME a b a b 

Ask that of old madam:
  She'll tell you who's who,
As far up as Adam,
  She knows it is true.

RHYME a b a b 

Come down with that beam,
  If cudgels are scarce,
A blow on the weam,
  Or a kick on the a----se.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

When first Diana leaves her bed,
  Vapours and steams her looks disgrace,
A frowzy dirty-colour'd red
  Sits on her cloudy wrinkled face:

RHYME a b a b 

But by degrees, when mounted high,
  Her artificial face appears
Down from her window in the sky,
  Her spots are gone, her visage clears.

RHYME a b a b 

'Twixt earthly females and the moon,
  All parallels exactly run;
If Celia should appear too soon,
  Alas, the nymph would be undone!

RHYME a b a b 

To see her from her pillow rise,
  All reeking in a cloudy steam,
Crack'd lips, foul teeth, and gummy eyes,
  Poor Strephon! how would he blaspheme!

RHYME a b a b 

The soot or powder which was wont
  To make her hair look black as jet,
Falls from her tresses on her front,
  A mingled mass of dirt and sweat.

RHYME a b a b 

Three colours, black, and red, and white
  So graceful in their proper place,
Remove them to a different light,
  They form a frightful hideous face:

RHYME a b a b 

For instance, when the lily slips
  Into the precincts of the rose,
And takes possession of the lips,
  Leaving the purple to the nose:

RHYME a b a b 

So Celia went entire to bed,
  All her complexion safe and sound;
But, when she rose, the black and red,
  Though still in sight, had changed their ground.

RHYME a b a b 

The black, which would not be confined,
  A more inferior station seeks,
Leaving the fiery red behind,
  And mingles in her muddy cheeks.

RHYME a b a b 

The paint by perspiration cracks,
  And falls in rivulets of sweat,
On either side you see the tracks
  While at her chin the conflu'nts meet.

RHYME a b a b 

A skilful housewife thus her thumb,
  With spittle while she spins anoints;
And thus the brown meanders come
  In trickling streams betwixt her joints.

RHYME a b a b 

But Celia can with ease reduce,
  By help of pencil, paint, and brush,
Each colour to its place and use,
  And teach her cheeks again to blush.

RHYME a b a b 

She knows her early self no more,
  But fill'd with admiration stands;
As other painters oft adore
  The workmanship of their own hands.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus, after four important hours,
  Celia's the wonder of her sex;
Say, which among the heavenly powers
  Could cause such wonderful effects?

RHYME a b a b 

Venus, indulgent to her kind,
  Gave women all their hearts could wish,
When first she taught them where to find
  White lead, and Lusitanian dish.

RHYME a b a b 

Love with white lead cements his wings;
  White lead was sent us to repair
Two brightest, brittlest, earthly things,
  A lady's face, and China-ware.

RHYME a b a b 

She ventures now to lift the sash;
  The window is her proper sphere;
Ah, lovely nymph! be not too rash,
  Nor let the beaux approach too near.

RHYME a b a b 

Take pattern by your sister star;
  Delude at once and bless our sight;
When you are seen, be seen from far,
  And chiefly choose to shine by night.

RHYME a b a b 

In the Pall Mall when passing by,
  Keep up the glasses of your chair,
Then each transported fop will cry,
  "G----d d----n me, Jack, she's wondrous fair!"

RHYME a b a b 

But art no longer can prevail,
  When the materials all are gone;
The best mechanic hand must fail,
  Where nothing's left to work upon.

RHYME a b a b 

Matter, as wise logicians say,
  Cannot without a form subsist;
And form, say I, as well as they,
  Must fail if matter brings no grist.

RHYME a b a b 

And this is fair Diana's case;
  For, all astrologers maintain,
Each night a bit drops off her face,
  When mortals say she's in her wane:

RHYME a b a b 

While Partridge wisely shows the cause
  Efficient of the moon's decay,
That Cancer with his pois'nous claws
  Attacks her in the milky way:

RHYME a b a b 

But Gadbury, in art profound,
  From her pale cheeks pretends to show
That swain Endymion is not sound,
  Or else that Mercury's her foe.

RHYME a b a b 

But let the cause be what it will,
  In half a month she looks so thin,
That Flamsteed can, with all his skill,
  See but her forehead and her chin.

RHYME a b a b 

Yet, as she wastes, she grows discreet,
  Till midnight never shows her head;
So rotting Celia strolls the street,
  When sober folks are all a-bed:

RHYME a b a b 

For sure, if this be Luna's fate,
  Poor Celia, but of mortal race,
In vain expects a longer date
  To the materials of her face.

RHYME a b a b 

When Mercury her tresses mows,
  To think of oil and soot is vain:
No painting can restore a nose,
  Nor will her teeth return again.

RHYME a b a b 

Two balls of glass may serve for eyes,
  White lead can plaister up a cleft;
But these, alas, are poor supplies
  If neither cheeks nor lips be left.

RHYME a b a b 

Ye powers who over love preside!
  Since mortal beauties drop so soon,
If ye would have us well supplied,
  Send us new nymphs with each new moon!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

AETATIS SUAE fifty-two,
A reverend Dean began to woo
A handsome, young, imperious girl,
Nearly related to an earl.
Her parents and her friends consent;
The couple to the temple went:
They first invite the Cyprian queen;
'Twas answer'd, "She would not be seen;"
But Cupid in disdain could scarce
Forbear to bid them kiss his ----
The Graces next, and all the Muses,
Were bid in form, but sent excuses.
Juno attended at the porch,
With farthing candle for a torch;
While mistress Iris held her train,
The faded bow bedropt with rain.
Then Hebe came, and took her place,
But show'd no more than half her face.
  Whate'er these dire forebodings meant,
In joy the marriage-day was spent;
The marriage-_day_, you take me right,
I promise nothing for the night.
The bridegroom, drest to make a figure,
Assumes an artificial vigour;
A flourish'd nightcap on, to grace
His ruddy, wrinkled, smirking face;
Like the faint red upon a pippin,
Half wither'd by a winter's keeping.

RHYME a a *

  And thus set out this happy pair,
The swain is rich, the nymph is fair;
But, what I gladly would forget,
The swain is old, the nymph coquette.
Both from the goal together start;
Scarce run a step before they part;
No common ligament that binds
The various textures of their minds;
Their thoughts and actions, hopes and fears,
Less corresponding than their years.
The Dean desires his coffee soon,
She rises to her tea at noon.
While the Dean goes out to cheapen books,
She at the glass consults her looks;
While Betty's buzzing at her ear,
Lord, what a dress these parsons wear!
So odd a choice how could she make!
Wish'd him a colonel for her sake.
Then, on her finger ends she counts,
Exact, to what his age amounts.
The Dean, she heard her uncle say,
Is sixty, if he be a day;
His ruddy cheeks are no disguise;
You see the crow's feet round his eyes.
  At one she rambles to the shops,
To cheapen tea, and talk with fops;
Or calls a council of her maids,
And tradesmen, to compare brocades.
Her weighty morning business o'er,
Sits down to dinner just at four;
Minds nothing that is done or said,
Her evening work so fills her head.
The Dean, who used to dine at one,
Is mawkish, and his stomach's gone;
In threadbare gown, would scarce a louse hold,
Looks like the chaplain of the household;
Beholds her, from the chaplain's place,
In French brocades, and Flanders lace;
He wonders what employs her brain,
But never asks, or asks in vain;
His mind is full of other cares,
And, in the sneaking parson's airs,
Computes, that half a parish dues
Will hardly find his wife in shoes.
  Canst thou imagine, dull divine,
'Twill gain her love, to make her fine?
Hath she no other wants beside?
You feed her lust as well as pride,
Enticing coxcombs to adore,
And teach her to despise thee more.

RHYME a a *

  If in her coach she'll condescend
To place him at the hinder end,
Her hoop is hoist above his nose,
His odious gown would soil her clothes.
She drops him at the church, to pray,
While she drives on to see the play.
He like an orderly divine,
Comes home a quarter after nine,
And meets her hasting to the ball:
Her chairmen push him from the wall.
The Dean gets in and walks up stairs,
And calls the family to prayers;
Then goes alone to take his rest
In bed, where he can spare her best.
At five the footmen make a din,
Her ladyship is just come in;
The masquerade began at two,
She stole away with much ado;
And shall be chid this afternoon,
For leaving company so soon:
She'll say, and she may truly say't,
She can't abide to stay out late.

RHYME a a *

  But now, though scarce a twelvemonth married,
Poor Lady Jane has thrice miscarried:
The cause, alas! is quickly guest;
The town has whisper'd round the jest.
Think on some remedy in time,
The Dean you see, is past his prime,
Already dwindled to a lath:
No other way but try the Bath.
  For Venus, rising from the ocean,
Infused a strong prolific potion,
That mix'd with Acheloüs spring,
The horned flood, as poets sing,
Who, with an English beauty smitten,
Ran under ground from Greece to Britain;
The genial virtue with him brought,
And gave the nymph a plenteous draught;
Then fled, and left his horn behind,
For husbands past their youth to find;
The nymph, who still with passion burn'd,
Was to a boiling fountain turn'd,
Where childless wives crowd every morn,
To drink in Acheloüs horn;
Or bathe beneath the Cross their limbs
Where fruitful matter chiefly swims.
And here the father often gains
That title by another's pains.
  Hither, though much against his grain
The Dean has carried Lady Jane.
He, for a while, would not consent,
But vow'd his money all was spent:
Was ever such a clownish reason!
And must my lady slip her season?
The doctor, with a double fee,
Was bribed to make the Dean agree.
  Here, all diversions of the place
Are proper in my lady's case:
With which she patiently complies,
Merely because her friends advise;
His money and her time employs
In music, raffling-rooms, and toys;
Or in the Cross-bath seeks an heir,
Since others oft have found one there;
Where if the Dean by chance appears,
It shames his cassock and his years.
He keeps his distance in the gallery,
Till banish'd by some coxcomb's raillery;
For 'twould his character expose,
To bathe among the belles and beaux.

RHYME a a *

  So have I seen, within a pen,
Young ducklings foster'd by a hen;
But, when let out, they run and muddle,
As instinct leads them, in a puddle;
The sober hen, not born to swim,
With mournful note clucks round the brim.
  The Dean, with all his best endeavour,
Gets not an heir, but gets a fever.
A victim to the last essays
Of vigour in declining days,
He dies, and leaves his mourning mate
(What could he less?) his whole estate.
  The widow goes through all her forms:
New lovers now will come in swarms.
O, may I see her soon dispensing
Her favours to some broken ensign!
Him let her marry for his face,
And only coat of tarnish'd lace;
To turn her naked out of doors,
And spend her jointure on his whores;
But, for a parting present, leave her
A rooted pox to last for ever!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

The farmer's goose, who in the stubble
Has fed without restraint or trouble,
Grown fat with corn and sitting still,
Can scarce get o'er the barn-door sill;
And hardly waddles forth to cool
Her belly in the neighbouring pool!
Nor loudly cackles at the door;
For cackling shows the goose is poor.
  But, when she must be turn'd to graze,
And round the barren common strays,
Hard exercise, and harder fare,
Soon make my dame grow lank and spare;
Her body light, she tries her wings,
And scorns the ground, and upward springs;
While all the parish, as she flies,
Hear sounds harmonious from the skies.
  Such is the poet fresh in pay,
The third night's profits of his play;
His morning draughts till noon can swill,
Among his brethren of the quill:
With good roast beef his belly full,
Grown lazy, foggy, fat, and dull,
Deep sunk in plenty and delight,
What poet e'er could take his flight?
Or, stuff'd with phlegm up to the throat,
What poet e'er could sing a note?
Nor Pegasus could bear the load
Along the high celestial road;
The steed, oppress'd, would break his girth,
To raise the lumber from the earth.

RHYME a a *

  But view him in another scene,
When all his drink is Hippocrene,
His money spent, his patrons fail,
His credit out for cheese and ale;
His two-years coat so smooth and bare,
Through every thread it lets in air;
With hungry meals his body pined,
His guts and belly full of wind;
And, like a jockey for a race,
His flesh brought down to flying case:
Now his exalted spirit loathes
Encumbrances of food and clothes;
And up he rises like a vapour,
Supported high on wings of paper.
He singing flies, and flying sings,
While from below all Grub-Street rings.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Ye wise philosophers, explain
  What magic makes our money rise,
When dropt into the Southern main;
  Or do these jugglers cheat our eyes?

RHYME a b a b 

Put in your money fairly told;
  _Presto_! be gone--'Tis here again:
Ladies and gentlemen, behold,
  Here's every piece as big as ten.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus in a basin drop a shilling,
  Then fill the vessel to the brim,
You shall observe, as you are filling,
  The pond'rous metal seems to swim:

RHYME a b a b 

It rises both in bulk and height,
  Behold it swelling like a sop;
The liquid medium cheats your sight:
  Behold it mounted to the top!

RHYME a b a b 

In stock three hundred thousand pounds,
  I have in view a lord's estate;
My manors all contiguous round!
  A coach-and-six, and served in plate!

RHYME a b a b 

Thus the deluded bankrupt raves,
  Puts all upon a desperate bet;
Then plunges in the Southern waves,
  Dipt over head and ears--in debt.

RHYME a b a b 

So, by a calenture misled,
  The mariner with rapture sees,
On the smooth ocean's azure bed,
  Enamell'd fields and verdant trees:

RHYME a b a b 

With eager haste he longs to rove
  In that fantastic scene, and thinks
It must be some enchanted grove;
  And in he leaps, and down he sinks.

RHYME a b a b 

Five hundred chariots just bespoke,
  Are sunk in these devouring waves,
The horses drown'd, the harness broke,
  And here the owners find their graves.

RHYME a b a b 

Like Pharaoh, by directors led,
  They with their spoils went safe before;
His chariots, tumbling out the dead,
  Lay shatter'd on the Red Sea shore.

RHYME a b a b 

Raised up on Hope's aspiring plumes,
  The young adventurer o'er the deep
An eagle's flight and state assumes,
  And scorns the middle way to keep.

RHYME a b a b 

On paper wings he takes his flight,
  With wax the father bound them fast;
The wax is melted by the height,
  And down the towering boy is cast.

RHYME a b a b 

A moralist might here explain
  The rashness of the Cretan youth;
Describe his fall into the main,
  And from a fable form a truth.

RHYME a b a b 

His wings are his paternal rent,
  He melts the wax at every flame;
His credit sunk, his money spent,
  In Southern Seas he leaves his name.

RHYME a b a b 

Inform us, you that best can tell,
  Why in that dangerous gulf profound,
Where hundreds and where thousands fell,
  Fools chiefly float, the wise are drown'd?

RHYME a b a b 

So have I seen from Severn's brink
  A flock of geese jump down together;
Swim where the bird of Jove would sink,
  And, swimming, never wet a feather.

RHYME a b a b 

But, I affirm, 'tis false in fact,
  Directors better knew their tools;
We see the nation's credit crack'd,
  Each knave has made a thousand fools.

RHYME a b a b 

One fool may from another win,
  And then get off with money stored;
But, if a sharper once comes in,
  He throws it all, and sweeps the board.

RHYME a b a b 

As fishes on each other prey,
  The great ones swallowing up the small,
So fares it in the Southern Sea;
  The whale directors eat up all.

RHYME a b a b 

When stock is high, they come between,
  Making by second-hand their offers;
Then cunningly retire unseen,
  With each a million in his coffers.

RHYME a b a b 

So, when upon a moonshine night,
  An ass was drinking at a stream,
A cloud arose, and stopt the light,
  By intercepting every beam:

RHYME a b a b 

The day of judgment will be soon,
  Cries out a sage among the crowd;
An ass has swallow'd up the moon!
  The moon lay safe behind the cloud.

RHYME a b a b 

Each poor subscriber to the sea
  Sinks down at once, and there he lies;
Directors fall as well as they,
  Their fall is but a trick to rise.

RHYME a b a b 

So fishes, rising from the main,
  Can soar with moisten'd wings on high;
The moisture dried, they sink again,
  And dip their fins again to fly.

RHYME a b a b 

Undone at play, the female troops
  Come here their losses to retrieve;
Ride o'er the waves in spacious hoops,
  Like Lapland witches in a sieve.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus Venus to the sea descends,
  As poets feign; but where's the moral?
It shows the Queen of Love intends
  To search the deep for pearl and coral.

RHYME a b a b 

The sea is richer than the land,
  I heard it from my grannam's mouth,
Which now I clearly understand;
  For by the sea she meant the South.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus, by directors we are told,
  "Pray, gentlemen, believe your eyes;
Our ocean's cover'd o'er with gold,
  Look round, and see how thick it lies:

RHYME a b a b 

"We, gentlemen, are your assisters,
  We'll come, and hold you by the chin."--
Alas! all is not gold that glisters,
  Ten thousand sink by leaping in.

RHYME a b a b 

O! would those patriots be so kind,
  Here in the deep to wash their hands,
Then, like Pactolus, we should find
  The sea indeed had golden sands.

RHYME a b a b 

A shilling in the bath you fling,
  The silver takes a nobler hue,
By magic virtue in the spring,
  And seems a guinea to your view.

RHYME a b a b 

But, as a guinea will not pass
  At market for a farthing more,
Shown through a multiplying glass,
  Than what it always did before:

RHYME a b a b 

So cast it in the Southern seas,
  Or view it through a jobber's bill;
Put on what spectacles you please,
  Your guinea's but a guinea still.

RHYME a b a b 

One night a fool into a brook
  Thus from a hillock looking down,
The golden stars for guineas took,
  And silver Cynthia for a crown.

RHYME a b a b 

The point he could no longer doubt;
  He ran, he leapt into the flood;
There sprawl'd a while, and scarce got out,
  All cover'd o'er with slime and mud.

RHYME a b a b 

"Upon the water cast thy bread,
  And after many days thou'lt find it;"
But gold, upon this ocean spread,
  Shall sink, and leave no mark behind it:

RHYME a b a b 

There is a gulf, where thousands fell,
  Here all the bold adventurers came,
A narrow sound, though deep as Hell--
  'Change Alley is the dreadful name.

RHYME a b a b 

Nine times a-day it ebbs and flows,
  Yet he that on the surface lies,
Without a pilot seldom knows
  The time it falls, or when 'twill rise.

RHYME a b a b 

Subscribers here by thousands float,
  And jostle one another down;
Each paddling in his leaky boat,
  And here they fish for gold, and drown.

RHYME a b a b 

"Now buried in the depth below,
  Now mounted up to Heaven again,
They reel and stagger to and fro,
  At their wits' end, like drunken men."

RHYME a b a b 

Meantime, secure on Garway cliffs,
  A savage race, by shipwrecks fed,
Lie waiting for the founder'd skiffs,
  And strip the bodies of the dead.

RHYME a b a b 

But these, you say, are factious lies,
  From some malicious Tory's brain;
For, where directors get a prize,
  The Swiss and Dutch whole millions drain.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus, when by rooks a lord is plied,
  Some cully often wins a bet,
By venturing on the cheating side,
  Though not into the secret let.

RHYME a b a b 

While some build castles in the air,
  Directors build them in the seas;
Subscribers plainly see them there,
  For fools will see as wise men please.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus oft by mariners are shown
  (Unless the men of Kent are liars)
Earl Godwin's castles overflown,
  And palace roofs, and steeple spires.

RHYME a b a b 

Mark where the sly directors creep,
  Nor to the shore approach too nigh!
The monsters nestle in the deep,
  To seize you in your passing by.

RHYME a b a b 

Then, like the dogs of Nile, be wise,
  Who, taught by instinct how to shun
The crocodile, that lurking lies,
  Run as they drink, and drink and run.

RHYME a b a b 

Antæus could, by magic charms,
  Recover strength whene'er he fell;
Alcides held him in his arms,
  And sent him up in air to Hell.

RHYME a b a b 

Directors, thrown into the sea,
  Recover strength and vigour there;
But may be tamed another way,
  Suspended for a while in air.

RHYME a b a b 

Directors! for 'tis you I warn,
  By long experience we have found
What planet ruled when you were born;
  We see you never can be drown'd.

RHYME a b a b 

Beware, nor overbulky grow,
  Nor come within your cully's reach;
For, if the sea should sink so low
  To leave you dry upon the beach,

RHYME a b a b 

You'll owe your ruin to your bulk:
  Your foes already waiting stand,
To tear you like a founder'd hulk,
  While you lie helpless on the sand.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus, when a whale has lost the tide,
  The coasters crowd to seize the spoil:
The monster into parts divide,
  And strip the bones, and melt the oil.

RHYME a b a b 

Oh! may some western tempest sweep
  These locusts whom our fruits have fed,
That plague, directors, to the deep,
  Driven from the South Sea to the Red!

RHYME a b a b 

May he, whom Nature's laws obey,
  Who lifts the poor, and sinks the proud,
"Quiet the raging of the sea,
  And still the madness of the crowd!"

RHYME a b a b 

But never shall our isle have rest,
  Till those devouring swine run down,
(The devils leaving the possest)
  And headlong in the waters drown.

RHYME a b a b 

The nation then too late will find,
  Computing all their cost and trouble,
Directors' promises but wind,
  South Sea, at best, a mighty bubble.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Our set of strollers, wandering up and down,
Hearing the house was empty, came to town;
And, with a license from our good lord mayor,
Went to one Griffith, formerly a player:
Him we persuaded, with a moderate bribe,
To speak to Elrington and all the tribe,
To let our company supply their places,
And hire us out their scenes, and clothes, and faces.
Is not the truth the truth? Look full on me;
I am not Elrington, nor Griffith he.
When we perform, look sharp among our crew,
There's not a creature here you ever knew.
The former folks were servants to the king;
We, humble strollers, always on the wing.
Now, for my part, I think, upon the whole,
Rather than starve, a better man would stroll.
  Stay! let me see--Three hundred pounds a-year,
For leave to act in town!--'Tis plaguy dear.
Now, here's a warrant; gallants, please to mark,
For three thirteens, and sixpence to the clerk.
Three hundred pounds! Were I the price to fix,
The public should bestow the actors six;
A score of guineas given underhand,
For a good word or so, we understand.
To help an honest lad that's out of place,
May cost a crown or so; a common case:
And, in a crew, 'tis no injustice thought
To ship a rogue, and pay him not a groat.
But, in the chronicles of former ages,
Who ever heard of servants paying wages?

RHYME a a *

  I pity Elrington with all my heart;
Would he were here this night to act my part!
I told him what it was to be a stroller;
How free we acted, and had no comptroller:
In every town we wait on Mr. Mayor,
First get a license, then produce our ware;
We sound a trumpet, or we beat a drum:
Huzza! (the schoolboys roar) the players are come;
And then we cry, to spur the bumpkins on,
Gallants, by Tuesday next we must be gone.
I told him in the smoothest way I could,
All this, and more, yet it would do no good.
But Elrington, tears falling from his cheeks,
He that has shone with Betterton and Wilks,
To whom our country has been always dear,
Who chose to leave his dearest pledges here,
Owns all your favours, here intends to stay,
And, as a stroller, act in every play:
And the whole crew this resolution takes,
To live and die all strollers, for your sakes;
Not frighted with an ignominious name,
For your displeasure is their only shame.
  A pox on Elrington's majestic tone!
Now to a word of business in our own.
  Gallants, next Thursday night will be our last:
Then without fail we pack up for Belfast.
Lose not your time, nor our diversion miss,
The next we act shall be as good as this.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

HOLD! hold, my good friends; for one moment, pray stop ye,
I return ye my thanks, in the name of poor Hoppy.
He's not the first person who never did write,
And yet has been fed by a benefit-night.
The custom is frequent, on my word I assure ye,
In our famed elder house, of the Hundreds of Drury.
But then you must know, those players still act on
Some very good reasons, for such benefaction.
  A deceased poet's widow, if pretty, can't fail;
From Cibber she holds, as a tenant in tail.
Your emerited actors, and actresses too,
For what they have done (though no more they can do)
And sitters, and songsters, and Chetwood and G----,
And sometimes a poor sufferer in the South Sea;
A machine-man, a tire-woman, a mute, and a spright,
Have been all kept from starving by a benefit-night.
  Thus, for Hoppy's bright merits, at length we have found
That he must have of us ninety-nine and one pound,
Paid to him clear money once every year:
And however some think it a little too dear,
Yet, for reasons of state, this sum we'll allow,
Though we pay the good man with the sweat of our brow.
  First, because by the King to us he was sent,
To guide the whole session of this parliament.
To preside in our councils, both public and private,
And so learn, by the by, what both houses do drive at.
When bold B---- roars, and meek M---- raves,
When Ash prates by wholesale, or Be----h by halves,
When Whigs become Whims, or join with the Tories;
And to himself constant when a member no more is,
But changes his sides, and votes and unvotes;
As S----t is dull, and with S----d, who dotes;
Then up must get Hoppy, and with voice very low,
And with eloquent bow, the house he must show,
That that worthy member who spoke last must give
The freedom to him, humbly most, to conceive,
That his sentiment on this affair isn't right;
That he mightily wonders which way he came by't:
That, for his part, God knows, he does such things disown;
And so, having convinced him, he most humbly sits down.

RHYME a a *

  For these, and more reasons, which perhaps you may hear,
Pounds hundred this night, and one hundred this year,
And so on we are forced, though we sweat out our blood,
To make these walls pay for poor Hoppy's good;
To supply with rare diet his pot and his spit;
And with richest Margoux to wash down a tit-bit.
To wash oft his fine linen, so clean and so neat,
And to buy him much linen, to fence against sweat:
All which he deserves; for although all the day
He ofttimes is heavy, yet all night he's gay;
And if he rise early to watch for the state,
To keep up his spirits he'll sit up as late.

RHYME a a a 

Thus, for these and more reasons, as before I did say
Hop has got all the money for our acting this play,
Which makes us poor actors look _je ne sçai quoy_.

RHYME a a *

Great cry, and little wool--is now become
The plague and proverb of the weaver's loom;
No wool to work on, neither weft nor warp;
Their pockets empty, and their stomachs sharp.
Provoked, in loud complaints to you they cry;
Ladies, relieve the weavers; or they die!
Forsake your silks for stuff's; nor think it strange
To shift your clothes, since you delight in change.
One thing with freedom I'll presume to tell--
The men will like you every bit as well.

  See I am dress'd from top to toe in stuff,
And, by my troth, I think I'm fine enough;
My wife admires me more, and swears she never,
In any dress, beheld me look so clever.
And if a man be better in such ware,
What great advantage must it give the fair!
Our wool from lambs of innocence proceeds;
Silks come from maggots, calicoes from weeds;

RHYME a a a 

Hence 'tis by sad experience that we find
Ladies in silks to vapours much inclined--
And what are they but maggots in the mind?

RHYME a a *

For which I think it reason to conclude,
That clothes may change our temper like our food.
Chintzes are gawdy, and engage our eyes
Too much about the party-colour'd dyes;
Although the lustre is from you begun,
We see the rainbow, and neglect the sun.

RHYME a a *

  How sweet and innocent's the country maid,
With small expense in native wool array'd;
Who copies from the fields her homely green,
While by her shepherd with delight she's seen!
Should our fair ladies dress like her, in wool
How much more lovely, and how beautiful,
Without their Indian drapery, they'd prove!
While wool would help to warm us into love!
Then, like the famous Argonauts of Greece,
We'll all contend to gain the Golden Fleece!

RHYME a a *

Who dares affirm this is no pious age,
When charity begins to tread the stage?
When actors, who at best are hardly savers,
Will give a night of benefit to weavers?
Stay--let me see, how finely will it sound!
_Imprimis_, From his grace a hundred pound.
Peers, clergy, gentry, all are benefactors;
And then comes in the _item_ of the actors.
_Item_, The actors freely give a day--
The poet had no more who made the play.
  But whence this wondrous charity in players?
They learn it not at sermons, or at prayers:
Under the rose, since here are none but friends,
(To own the truth) we have some private ends.
Since waiting-women, like exacting jades,
Hold up the prices of their old brocades;
We'll dress in manufactures made at home;
Equip our kings and generals at the Comb.
We'll rig from Meath Street Egypt's haughty queen
And Antony shall court her in ratteen.
In blue shalloon shall Hannibal be clad,
And Scipio trail an Irish purple plaid,
In drugget drest, of thirteen pence a-yard,
See Philip's son amidst his Persian guard;
And proud Roxana, fired with jealous rage,
With fifty yards of crape shall sweep the stage.
In short, our kings and princesses within
Are all resolved this project to begin;
And you, our subjects, when you here resort,
Must imitate the fashion of the court.
  O! could I see this audience clad in stuff,
Though money's scarce, we should have trade enough:
But chintz, brocades, and lace, take all away,
And scarce a crown is left to see the play.
Perhaps you wonder whence this friendship springs
Between the weavers and us playhouse kings;
But wit and weaving had the same beginning;
Pallas first taught us poetry and spinning:
And, next, observe how this alliance fits,
For weavers now are just as poor as wits:
Their brother quillmen, workers for the stage,
For sorry stuff can get a crown a page;
But weavers will be kinder to the players,
And sell for twenty pence a yard of theirs.
And to your knowledge, there is often less in
The poet's wit, than in the player's dressing.

RHYME a a *

The Muses, whom the richest silks array,
Refuse to fling their shining gowns away;
The pencil clothes the nine in bright brocades,
And gives each colour to the pictured maids;
Far above mortal dress the sisters shine,
Pride in their Indian Robes, and must be fine.
And shall two bards in concert rhyme, and huff
And fret these Muses with their playhouse stuff?
  The player in mimic piety may storm,
Deplore the Comb, and bid her heroes arm:
The arbitrary mob, in paltry rage,
May curse the belles and chintzes of the age:
Yet still the artist worm her silk shall share,
And spin her thread of life in service of the fair.

RHYME a a *

  The cotton plant, whom satire cannot blast,
Shall bloom the favourite of these realms, and last;
Like yours, ye fair, her fame from censure grows,
Prevails in charms, and glares above her foes:
Your injured plant shall meet a loud defence,
And be the emblem of your innocence.

RHYME a a *

  Some bard, perhaps, whose landlord was a weaver,
Penn'd the low prologue to return a favour:
Some neighbour wit, that would be in the vogue,
Work'd with his friend, and wove the epilogue.
Who weaves the chaplet, or provides the bays,
For such wool-gathering sonnetteers as these?
Hence, then, ye homespun witlings, that persuade
Miss Chloe to the fashion of her maid.
Shall the wide hoop, that standard of the town,
Thus act subservient to a poplin gown?
Who'd smell of wool all over? 'Tis enough
The under petticoat be made of stuff.

RHYME a a a 

Lord! to be wrapt in flannel just in May,
When the fields dress'd in flowers appear so gay!
And shall not miss be flower'd as well as they?

RHYME a a *

  In what weak colours would the plaid appear,
Work'd to a quilt, or studded in a chair!
The skin, that vies with silk, would fret with stuff;
Or who could bear in bed a thing so rough?
Ye knowing fair, how eminent that bed,
Where the chintz diamonds with the silken thread,
Where rustling curtains call the curious eye,
And boast the streaks and paintings of the sky!
Of flocks they'd have your milky ticking full:
And all this for the benefit of wool!
  "But where," say they, "shall we bestow these weavers,
That spread our streets, and are such piteous cravers?"
The silk-worms (brittle beings!) prone to fate,
Demand their care, to make their webs complete:
These may they tend, their promises receive;
We cannot pay too much for what they give!

RHYME a a *

Thalia, tell, in sober lays,
How George, Nim, Dan, Dean, pass their days;
And, should our Gaulstown's wit grow fallow,
Yet _Neget quis carmina Gallo?_
Here (by the way) by Gallus mean I
Not Sheridan, but friend Delany.
Begin, my Muse! First from our bowers
We sally forth at different hours;
At seven the Dean, in night-gown drest,
Goes round the house to wake the rest;
At nine, grave Nim and George facetious,
Go to the Dean, to read Lucretius;
At ten my lady comes and hectors
And kisses George, and ends our lectures;
And when she has him by the neck fast,
Hauls him, and scolds us, down to breakfast.
We squander there an hour or more,
And then all hands, boys, to the oar;
All, heteroclite Dan except,
Who never time nor order kept,

RHYME a a *

But by peculiar whimseys drawn,
Peeps in the ponds to look for spawn:
O'ersees the work, or Dragon rows,
Or mars a text, or mends his hose;
Or--but proceed we in our journal--
At two, or after, we return all:
From the four elements assembling,
Warn'd by the bell, all folks come trembling,
From airy garrets some descend,
Some from the lake's remotest end;
My lord and Dean the fire forsake,
Dan leaves the earthy spade and rake;
The loiterers quake, no corner hides them
And Lady Betty soundly chides them.
Now water brought, and dinner done;
With "Church and King" the ladies gone.
Not reckoning half an hour we pass
In talking o'er a moderate glass.
Dan, growing drowsy, like a thief
Steals off to doze away his beef;
And this must pass for reading Hammond--
While George and Dean go to backgammon.
George, Nim, and Dean, set out at four,
And then, again, boys, to the oar.
But when the sun goes to the deep,
(Not to disturb him in his sleep,
Or make a rumbling o'er his head,
His candle out, and he a-bed,)
We watch his motions to a minute,
And leave the flood when he goes in it.

RHYME a a *

Now stinted in the shortening day,
We go to prayers and then to play,
Till supper comes; and after that
We sit an hour to drink and chat.
'Tis late--the old and younger pairs,
By Adam lighted, walk up stairs.
The weary Dean goes to his chamber;
And Nim and Dan to garret clamber,
So when the circle we have run,
The curtain falls and all is done.
  I might have mention'd several facts,
Like episodes between the acts;
And tell who loses and who wins,
Who gets a cold, who breaks his shins;
How Dan caught nothing in his net,
And how the boat was overset.
For brevity I have retrench'd
How in the lake the Dean was drench'd:
It would be an exploit to brag on,
How valiant George rode o'er the Dragon;
How steady in the storm he sat,
And saved his oar, but lost his hat:
How Nim (no hunter e'er could match him)
Still brings us hares, when he can catch 'em;

RHYME a a *

How skilfully Dan mends his nets;
How fortune fails him when he sets;
Or how the Dean delights to vex
The ladies, and lampoon their sex:
I might have told how oft Dean Perceval
Displays his pedantry unmerciful,
How haughtily he cocks his nose,
To tell what every schoolboy knows:
And with his finger and his thumb,
Explaining, strikes opposers dumb:
But now there needs no more be said on't,
Nor how his wife, that female pedant,
Shews all her secrets of housekeeping:
For candles how she trucks her dripping;
Was forced to send three miles for yeast,
To brew her ale, and raise her paste;

RHYME a a *

Tells everything that you can think of,
How she cured Charley of the chincough;
What gave her brats and pigs the measles,
And how her doves were killed by weasels;
How Jowler howl'd, and what a fright
She had with dreams the other night.
  But now, since I have gone so far on,
A word or two of Lord Chief Baron;
And tell how little weight he sets
On all Whig papers and gazettes;
But for the politics of Pue,
Thinks every syllable is true:
And since he owns the King of Sweden 
Is dead at last, without evading,
Now all his hopes are in the czar;
"Why, Muscovy is not so far;

RHYME a a *

Down the Black Sea, and up the Straits,
And in a month he's at your gates;
Perhaps from what the packet brings,
By Christmas we shall see strange things."
Why should I tell of ponds and drains,
What carps we met with for our pains;
Of sparrows tamed, and nuts innumerable
To choke the girls, and to consume a rabble?
But you, who are a scholar, know
How transient all things are below,
How prone to change is human life!
Last night arrived Clem and his wife--
This grand event has broke our measures;
Their reign began with cruel seizures;
The Dean must with his quilt supply
The bed in which those tyrants lie;
Nim lost his wig-block, Dan his Jordan,
(My lady says, she can't afford one,)
George is half scared out of his wits,
For Clem gets all the dainty bits.
Henceforth expect a different survey,
This house will soon turn topsyturvy;
They talk of farther alterations,
Which causes many speculations.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

WOULD you that Delville I describe?
Believe me, Sir, I will not gibe:
For who would be satirical
Upon a thing so very small?
  You scarce upon the borders enter,
Before you're at the very centre.
A single crow can make it night,
When o'er your farm she takes her flight:
Yet, in this narrow compass, we
Observe a vast variety;
Both walks, walls, meadows, and parterres,
Windows and doors, and rooms and stairs,
And hills and dales, and woods and fields,
And hay, and grass, and corn, it yields:
All to your haggard brought so cheap in,
Without the mowing or the reaping:
A razor, though to say't I'm loth,
Would shave you and your meadows both.
  Though small's the farm, yet here's a house
Full large to entertain a mouse;
But where a rat is dreaded more
Than savage Caledonian boar;
For, if it's enter'd by a rat,
There is no room to bring a cat.
  A little rivulet seems to steal
Down through a thing you call a vale,
Like tears adown a wrinkled cheek,
Like rain along a blade of leek:
And this you call your sweet meander,
Which might be suck'd up by a gander,
Could he but force his nether bill
To scoop the channel of the rill.
For sure you'd make a mighty clutter,
Were it as big as city gutter.
Next come I to your kitchen garden,
Where one poor mouse would fare but hard in;
And round this garden is a walk
No longer than a tailor's chalk;
Thus I compare what space is in it,
A snail creeps round it in a minute.
One lettuce makes a shift to squeeze
Up through a tuft you call your trees:
And, once a year, a single rose
Peeps from the bud, but never blows;
In vain then you expect its bloom!
It cannot blow for want of room.
  In short, in all your boasted seat,
There's nothing but yourself that's GREAT.

RHYME a a *

A bard, grown desirous of saving his pelf,
Built a house he was sure would hold none but himself.
This enraged god Apollo, who Mercury sent,
And bid him go ask what his votary meant?
"Some foe to my empire has been his adviser:
'Tis of dreadful portent when a poet turns miser!
Tell him, Hermes, from me, tell that subject of mine,
I have sworn by the Styx, to defeat his design;
For wherever he lives, the Muses shall reign;
And the Muses, he knows, have a numerous train."

RHYME a a *

Lo! from the top of yonder cliff, that shrouds
Its airy head amid the azure clouds,
Hangs a huge fragment; destitute of props,
Prone on the wave the rocky ruin drops;
With hoarse rebuff the swelling seas rebound,
From shore to shore the rocks return the sound:
The dreadful murmur Heaven's high convex cleaves,
And Neptune shrinks beneath his subject waves:
For, long the whirling winds and beating tides
Had scoop'd a vault into its nether sides.
Now yields the base, the summits nod, now urge
Their headlong course, and lash the sounding surge.
Not louder noise could shake the guilty world,
When Jove heap'd mountains upon mountains hurl'd;
Retorting Pelion from his dread abode,
To crush Earth's rebel sons beneath the load.
  Oft too with hideous yawn the cavern wide
Presents an orifice on either side.
A dismal orifice, from sea to sea
Extended, pervious to the God of Day:
Uncouthly join'd, the rocks stupendous form
An arch, the ruin of a future storm:
High on the cliff their nests the woodquests make,
And sea-calves stable in the oozy lake.
  But when bleak Winter with his sullen train
Awakes the winds to vex the watery plain;
When o'er the craggy steep without control,
Big with the blast, the raging billows roll;
Not towns beleaguer'd, not the flaming brand,
Darted from Heaven by Jove's avenging hand,
Oft as on impious men his wrath he pours,
Humbles their pride and blasts their gilded towers,
Equal the tumult of this wild uproar:
Waves rush o'er waves, rebellows shore to shore.
The neighbouring race, though wont to brave the shocks
Of angry seas, and run along the rocks,
Now, pale with terror, while the ocean foams,
Fly far and wide, nor trust their native homes.
  The goats, while, pendent from the mountain top,
The wither'd herb improvident they crop,
Wash'd down the precipice with sudden sweep,
Leave their sweet lives beneath th'unfathom'd deep.
  The frighted fisher, with desponding eyes,
Though safe, yet trembling in the harbour lies,
Nor hoping to behold the skies serene,
Wearies with vows the monarch of the main.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

COME, be content, since out it must,
For Stella has betray'd her trust;
And, whispering, charged me not to say
That Mr. Ford was born to-day;
Or, if at last I needs must blab it,
According to my usual habit,
She bid me, with a serious face,
Be sure conceal the time and place;
And not my compliment to spoil,
By calling this your native soil;
Or vex the ladies, when they knew
That you are turning forty-two:
But, if these topics shall appear
Strong arguments to keep you here,
I think, though you judge hardly of it,
Good manners must give place to profit.

RHYME a a *

  The nymphs, with whom you first began,
Are each become a harridan;
And Montague so far decay'd,
Her lovers now must all be paid;
And every belle that since arose,
Has her contemporary beaux.
Your former comrades, once so bright,
With whom you toasted half the night,
Of rheumatism and pox complain,
And bid adieu to dear champaign.
Your great protectors, once in power,
Are now in exile or the Tower.
Your foes triumphant o'er the laws,
Who hate your person and your cause,
If once they get you on the spot,
You must be guilty of the plot;
For, true or false, they'll ne'er inquire,
But use you ten times worse than Prior.
  In London! what would you do there?
Can you, my friend, with patience bear
(Nay, would it not your passion raise
Worse than a pun, or Irish phrase)
To see a scoundrel strut and hector,
A foot-boy to some rogue director,
To look on vice triumphant round,
And virtue trampled on the ground?
Observe where bloody **** stands
With torturing engines in his hands,
Hear him blaspheme, and swear, and rail,
Threatening the pillory and jail:
If this you think a pleasing scene,
To London straight return again;
Where, you have told us from experience,
Are swarms of bugs and presbyterians.

RHYME a a *

  I thought my very spleen would burst,
When fortune hither drove me first;
Was full as hard to please as you,
Nor persons' names nor places knew:
But now I act as other folk,
Like prisoners when their gaol is broke.

RHYME a a *

  If you have London still at heart,
We'll make a small one here by art;
The difference is not much between
St. James's Park and Stephen's Green;
And Dawson Street will serve as well
To lead you thither as Pall Mall.
Nor want a passage through the palace,
To choke your sight, and raise your malice.
The Deanery-house may well be match'd,
Under correction, with the Thatch'd.
Nor shall I, when you hither come,
Demand a crown a-quart for stum.
Then for a middle-aged charmer,
Stella may vie with your Mounthermer;
She's now as handsome every bit,
And has a thousand times her wit
The Dean and Sheridan, I hope,
Will half supply a Gay and Pope.
Corbet, though yet I know his worth not,
No doubt, will prove a good Arbuthnot.
I throw into the bargain Tim;
In London can you equal him?
What think you of my favourite clan,
Robin and Jack, and Jack and Dan;
Fellows of modest worth and parts,
With cheerful looks and honest hearts?

RHYME a a *

  Can you on Dublin look with scorn?
Yet here were you and Ormond born.
  O! were but you and I so wise,
To see with Robert Grattan's eyes!
Robin adores that spot of earth,
That literal spot which gave him birth;
And swears, "Belcamp is, to his taste,
As fine as Hampton-court at least."
When to your friends you would enhance
The praise of Italy or France,
For grandeur, elegance, and wit,
We gladly hear you, and submit;
But then, to come and keep a clutter,
For this or that side of a gutter,
To live in this or t'other isle,
We cannot think it worth your while;
For, take it kindly or amiss,
The difference but amounts to this,
We bury on our side the channel
In linen; and on yours in flannel.
You for the news are ne'er to seek;
While we, perhaps, may wait a week;
You happy folks are sure to meet
A hundred whores in every street;
While we may trace all Dublin o'er
Before we find out half a score.
  You see my arguments are strong,
I wonder you held out so long;
But, since you are convinced at last,
We'll pardon you for what has past.
So--let us now for whist prepare;
Twelve pence a corner, if you dare.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

THOSE dreams, that on the silent night intrude,
And with false flitting shades our minds delude
Jove never sends us downward from the skies;
Nor can they from infernal mansions rise;
But are all mere productions of the brain,
And fools consult interpreters in vain.

RHYME a a *

For when in bed we rest our weary limbs,
The mind unburden'd sports in various whims;
The busy head with mimic art runs o'er
The scenes and actions of the day before.

RHYME a a *

The drowsy tyrant, by his minions led,
To regal rage devotes some patriot's head.
With equal terrors, not with equal guilt,
The murderer dreams of all the blood he spilt.

RHYME a a *

The soldier smiling hears the widow's cries,
And stabs the son before the mother's eyes.
With like remorse his brother of the trade,
The butcher, fells the lamb beneath his blade.

RHYME a a *

The statesman rakes the town to find a plot,
And dreams of forfeitures by treason got.
Nor less Tom-t--d-man, of true statesman mould,
Collects the city filth in search of gold.

RHYME a a *

Orphans around his bed the lawyer sees,
And takes the plaintiff's and defendant's fees.
His fellow pick-purse, watching for a job,
Fancies his fingers in the cully's fob.

RHYME a a *

The kind physician grants the husband's prayers,
Or gives relief to long-expecting heirs.
The sleeping hangman ties the fatal noose,
Nor unsuccessful waits for dead men's shoes.

RHYME a a *

The grave divine, with knotty points perplext,
As if he were awake, nods o'er his text:
While the sly mountebank attends his trade,
Harangues the rabble, and is better paid.

RHYME a a *

The hireling senator of modern days
Bedaubs the guilty great with nauseous praise:
And Dick, the scavenger, with equal grace
Flirts from his cart the mud in Walpole's face.

RHYME a a *

Dear Sir, I think, 'tis doubly hard,
Your ears and doors should both be barr'd.
Can anything be more unkind?
Must I not see, 'cause you are blind?
Methinks a friend at night should cheer you,--
A friend that loves to see and hear you.
Why am I robb'd of that delight,
When you can be no loser by't
Nay, when 'tis plain (for what is plainer?)
That if you heard you'd be no gainer?
For sure you are not yet to learn,
That hearing is not your concern.
Then be your doors no longer barr'd:
Your business, sir, is to be heard.

RHYME a a *

The wise pretend to make it clear,
'Tis no great loss to lose an ear.
Why are we then so fond of two,
When by experience one would do?
  'Tis true, say they, cut off the head,
And there's an end; the man is dead;
Because, among all human race,
None e'er was known to have a brace:
But confidently they maintain,
That where we find the members twain,
The loss of one is no such trouble,
Since t'other will in strength be double.
The limb surviving, you may swear,
Becomes his brother's lawful heir:
Thus, for a trial, let me beg of
Your reverence but to cut one leg off,
And you shall find, by this device,
The other will be stronger twice;
For every day you shall be gaining
New vigour to the leg remaining.
So, when an eye has lost its brother,
You see the better with the other,
Cut off your hand, and you may do
With t'other hand the work of two:
Because the soul her power contracts,
And on the brother limb reacts.
  But yet the point is not so clear in
Another case, the sense of hearing:
For, though the place of either ear
Be distant, as one head can bear,
Yet Galen most acutely shows you,
(Consult his book _de partium usu_)
That from each ear, as he observes,
There creep two auditory nerves,
Not to be seen without a glass,
Which near the _os petrosum_ pass;
Thence to the neck; and moving thorough there,
One goes to this, and one to t'other ear;
Which made my grandam always stuff her ears
Both right and left, as fellow-sufferers.
You see my learning; but, to shorten it,
When my left ear was deaf a fortnight,
To t'other ear I felt it coming on:
And thus I solve this hard phenomenon.

RHYME a a *

'Tis true, a glass will bring supplies
To weak, or old, or clouded eyes:
Your arms, though both your eyes were lost,
Would guard your nose against a post:
Without your legs, two legs of wood
Are stronger, and almost as good:
And as for hands, there have been those
Who, wanting both, have used their toes.
But no contrivance yet appears
To furnish artificial ears.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

NELL scolded in so loud a din,
That Will durst hardly venture in:
He mark'd the conjugal dispute;
Nell roar'd incessant, Dick sat mute;
But, when he saw his friend appear,
Cried bravely, "Patience, good my dear!"
At sight of Will she bawl'd no more,
But hurried out and clapt the door.
  Why, Dick! the devil's in thy Nell,
(Quoth Will,) thy house is worse than Hell.
Why what a peal the jade has rung!
D--n her, why don't you slit her tongue?
For nothing else will make it cease.
Dear Will, I suffer this for peace:
I never quarrel with my wife;
I bear it for a quiet life.
Scripture, you know, exhorts us to it;
Bids us to seek peace, and ensue it.
  Will went again to visit Dick;
And entering in the very nick,

RHYME a a *

He saw virago Nell belabour,
With Dick's own staff, his peaceful neighbour.
Poor Will, who needs must interpose,
Received a brace or two of blows.
But now, to make my story short,
Will drew out Dick to take a quart.
Why, Dick, thy wife has devilish whims;
Ods-buds! why don't you break her limbs?
If she were mine, and had such tricks,
I'd teach her how to handle sticks:
Z--ds! I would ship her to Jamaica,
Or truck the carrion for tobacco:
I'd send her far enough away----
Dear Will; but what would people say?
Lord! I should get so ill a name,
The neighbours round would cry out shame.
  Dick suffer'd for his peace and credit;
But who believed him when he said it?
Can he, who makes himself a slave,
Consult his peace, or credit save?
Dick found it by his ill success,
His quiet small, his credit less.
She served him at the usual rate;
She stunn'd, and then she broke his pate:
And what he thought the hardest case,
The parish jeer'd him to his face;
Those men who wore the breeches least,
Call'd him a cuckold, fool, and beast.
At home he was pursued with noise;
Abroad was pester'd by the boys:
Within, his wife would break his bones:
Without, they pelted him with stones;
The 'prentices procured a riding,
To act his patience and her chiding.
False patience and mistaken pride!
There are ten thousand Dicks beside;
Slaves to their quiet and good name,
Are used like Dick, and bear the blame.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Ye poets ragged and forlorn,
  Down from your garrets haste;
Ye rhymers, dead as soon as born,
  Not yet consign'd to paste;

RHYME a b a b 

I know a trick to make you thrive;
  O, 'tis a quaint device:
Your still-born poems shall revive,
  And scorn to wrap up spice.

RHYME a b a b 

Get all your verses printed fair,
  Then let them well be dried;
And Curll must have a special care
  To leave the margin wide.

RHYME a b a b 

Lend these to paper-sparing Pope;
  And when he sets to write,
No letter with an envelope
  Could give him more delight.

RHYME a b a b 

When Pope has fill'd the margins round,
  Why then recall your loan;
Sell them to Curll for fifty pound,
  And swear they are your own.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

In spight of Pope, in spight of Gay,
And all that he or they can say;
Sing on I must, and sing I will,
Of Richmond Lodge and Marble Hill.
  Last Friday night, as neighbours use,
This couple met to talk of news:
For, by old proverbs, it appears,
That walls have tongues, and hedges ears.

RHYME a a *

Quoth Marble Hill, right well I ween,
Your mistress now is grown a queen;
You'll find it soon by woful proof,
She'll come no more beneath your roof.

RHYME a a *

The kingly prophet well evinces,
That we should put no trust in princes:
My royal master promised me
To raise me to a high degree:
But now he's grown a king, God wot,
I fear I shall be soon forgot.
You see, when folks have got their ends,
How quickly they neglect their friends;
Yet I may say, 'twixt me and you,
Pray God, they now may find as true!

RHYME a a *

My house was built but for a show,
My lady's empty pockets know;
And now she will not have a shilling,
To raise the stairs, or build the ceiling;
For all the courtly madams round
Now pay four shillings in the pound;
'Tis come to what I always thought:
My dame is hardly worth a groat.
Had you and I been courtiers born,
We should not thus have lain forlorn;
For those we dext'rous courtiers call,
Can rise upon their masters' fall:
But we, unlucky and unwise,
Must fall because our masters rise.

RHYME a a *

My master, scarce a fortnight since,
Was grown as wealthy as a prince;
But now it will be no such thing,
For he'll be poor as any king;
And by his crown will nothing get,
But like a king to run in debt.

RHYME a a *

No more the Dean, that grave divine,
Shall keep the key of my (no) wine;
My ice-house rob, as heretofore,
And steal my artichokes no more;
Poor Patty Blount no more be seen
Bedraggled in my walks so green:
Plump Johnny Gay will now elope;
And here no more will dangle Pope.

RHYME a a *

Here wont the Dean, when he's to seek,
To spunge a breakfast once a-week;
To cry the bread was stale, and mutter
Complaints against the royal butter.
But now I fear it will be said,
No butter sticks upon his bread.
We soon shall find him full of spleen,
For want of tattling to the queen;
Stunning her royal ears with talking;
His reverence and her highness walking:
While Lady Charlotte, like a stroller,
Sits mounted on the garden-roller.
A goodly sight to see her ride,
With ancient Mirmont at her side.
In velvet cap his head lies warm,
His hat, for show, beneath his arm.

RHYME a a *

Some South-Sea broker from the city
Will purchase me, the more's the pity;
Lay all my fine plantations waste,
To fit them to his vulgar taste:
Chang'd for the worse in ev'ry part,
My master Pope will break his heart.

RHYME a a *

In my own Thames may I be drownded,
If e'er I stoop beneath a crown'd head:
Except her majesty prevails
To place me with the Prince of Wales;
And then I shall be free from fears,
For he'll be prince these fifty years.
I then will turn a courtier too,
And serve the times as others do.
Plain loyalty, not built on hope,
I leave to your contriver, Pope;
None loves his king and country better,
Yet none was ever less their debtor.

RHYME a a *

Then let him come and take a nap
In summer on my verdant lap;
Prefer our villas, where the Thames is,
To Kensington, or hot St. James's;
Nor shall I dull in silence sit;
For 'tis to me he owes his wit;
My groves, my echoes, and my birds,
Have taught him his poetic words.
We gardens, and you wildernesses,
Assist all poets in distresses.
Him twice a-week I here expect,
To rattle Moody for neglect;
An idle rogue, who spends his quartridge
In tippling at the Dog and Partridge;
And I can hardly get him down
Three times a-week to brush my gown.

RHYME a a *

I pity you, dear Marble Hill;
But hope to see you flourish still.
All happiness--and so adieu.
Kind Richmond Lodge, the same to you.

RHYME a a *

  'Tis strange what different thoughts inspire
In men, Possession and Desire!
Think what they wish so great a blessing;
So disappointed when possessing!
  A moralist profoundly sage
(I know not in what book or page,
Or whether o'er a pot of ale)
Related thus the following tale.
  Possession, and Desire, his brother,
But still at variance with each other,
Were seen contending in a race;
And kept at first an equal pace;
'Tis said, their course continued long,
For this was active, that was strong:
Till Envy, Slander, Sloth, and Doubt,
Misled them many a league about;

RHYME a a *

Seduced by some deceiving light,
They take the wrong way for the right;
Through slippery by-roads, dark and deep,
They often climb, and often creep.
  Desire, the swifter of the two,
Along the plain like lightning flew:
Till, entering on a broad highway,
Where power and titles scatter'd lay,
He strove to pick up all he found,
And by excursions lost his ground:
No sooner got, than with disdain
He threw them on the ground again;

RHYME a a *

And hasted forward to pursue
Fresh objects, fairer to his view,
In hope to spring some nobler game;
But all he took was just the same:
Too scornful now to stop his pace,
He spurn'd them in his rival's face.
  Possession kept the beaten road,
And gather'd all his brother strew'd;
But overcharged, and out of wind,
Though strong in limbs, he lagg'd behind.
  Desire had now the goal in sight;
It was a tower of monstrous height;

RHYME a a *

Where on the summit Fortune stands,
A crown and sceptre in her hands;
Beneath, a chasm as deep as Hell,
Where many a bold adventurer fell.
Desire, in rapture, gazed awhile,
And saw the treacherous goddess smile;
But as he climb'd to grasp the crown,
She knock'd him with the sceptre down!

RHYME a a *

He tumbled in the gulf profound;
There doom'd to whirl an endless round.
  Possession's load was grown so great,
He sunk beneath the cumbrous weight;
And, as he now expiring lay,
Flocks every ominous bird of prey;
The raven, vulture, owl, and kite,
At once upon his carcass light,
And strip his hide, and pick his bones,
Regardless of his dying groans.

RHYME a a *

Ye wise, instruct me to endure
An evil, which admits no cure;
Or, how this evil can be borne,
Which breeds at once both hate and scorn.
Bare innocence is no support,
When you are tried in Scandal's court.
Stand high in honour, wealth, or wit;
All others, who inferior sit,
Conceive themselves in conscience bound
To join, and drag you to the ground.
Your altitude offends the eyes
Of those who want the power to rise.
The world, a willing stander-by,
Inclines to aid a specious lie:
Alas! they would not do you wrong;
But all appearances are strong.
  Yet whence proceeds this weight we lay
On what detracting people say!
For let mankind discharge their tongues
In venom, till they burst their lungs,
Their utmost malice cannot make
Your head, or tooth, or finger ache;
Nor spoil your shape, distort your face,
Or put one feature out of place;
Nor will you find your fortune sink
By what they speak or what they think;
Nor can ten hundred thousand lies
Make you less virtuous, learn'd, or wise.
  The most effectual way to balk
Their malice, is--to let them talk.

RHYME a a *

A set of phrases learn'd by rote;
A passion for a scarlet coat;
When at a play, to laugh or cry,
Yet cannot tell the reason why;
Never to hold her tongue a minute,
While all she prates has nothing in it;
Whole hours can with a coxcomb sit,
And take his nonsense all for wit;
Her learning mounts to read a song,
But half the words pronouncing wrong;
Has every repartee in store
She spoke ten thousand times before;
Can ready compliments supply
On all occasions cut and dry;
Such hatred to a parson's gown,
The sight would put her in a swoon;
For conversation well endued,
She calls it witty to be rude;
And, placing raillery in railing,
Will tell aloud your greatest failing;
Nor make a scruple to expose
Your bandy leg, or crooked nose;
Can at her morning tea run o'er
The scandal of the day before;
Improving hourly in her skill,
To cheat and wrangle at quadrille.
  In choosing lace, a critic nice,
Knows to a groat the lowest price;
Can in her female clubs dispute,
What linen best the silk will suit,
What colours each complexion match,
And where with art to place a patch.
  If chance a mouse creeps in her sight,
Can finely counterfeit a fright;
So sweetly screams, if it comes near her,
She ravishes all hearts to hear her.
Can dext'rously her husband teaze,
By taking fits whene'er she please;
By frequent practice learns the trick
At proper seasons to be sick;
Thinks nothing gives one airs so pretty,
At once creating love and pity;
If Molly happens to be careless,
And but neglects to warm her hair-lace,
She gets a cold as sure as death,
And vows she scarce can fetch her breath;
Admires how modest women can
Be so robustious like a man.
  In party, furious to her power;
A bitter Whig, or Tory sour;
Her arguments directly tend
Against the side she would defend;
Will prove herself a Tory plain,
From principles the Whigs maintain;
And, to defend the Whiggish cause,
Her topics from the Tories draws.
  O yes! if any man can find
More virtues in a woman's mind,
Let them be sent to Mrs. Harding;
She'll pay the charges to a farthing;
Take notice, she has my commission
To add them in the next edition;
They may outsell a better thing:
So, holla, boys; God save the King!

TITLE

RHYME a a *

As clever Tom Clinch, while the rabble was bawling,
Rode stately through Holborn to die in his calling,
He stopt at the George for a bottle of sack,
And promised to pay for it when he came back.
His waistcoat, and stockings, and breeches, were white;
His cap had a new cherry ribbon to tie't.
The maids to the doors and the balconies ran,
And said, "Lack-a-day, he's a proper young man!"
But, as from the windows the ladies he spied,
Like a beau in the box, he bow'd low on each side!
And when his last speech the loud hawkers did cry,
He swore from his cart, "It was all a damn'd lie!"
The hangman for pardon fell down on his knee;
Tom gave him a kick in the guts for his fee:
Then said, I must speak to the people a little;
But I'll see you all damn'd before I will whittle.
My honest friend Wild (may he long hold his place)
He lengthen'd my life with a whole year of grace.
Take courage, dear comrades, and be not afraid,
Nor slip this occasion to follow your trade;
My conscience is clear, and my spirits are calm,
And thus I go off, without prayer-book or psalm;
Then follow the practice of clever Tom Clinch,
Who hung like a hero, and never would flinch.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

POPE has the talent well to speak,
  But not to reach the ear;
His loudest voice is low and weak,
  The Dean too deaf to hear.

RHYME a b a b 

Awhile they on each other look,
  Then different studies choose;
The Dean sits plodding on a book;
  Pope walks, and courts the Muse.

RHYME a b a b 

Now backs of letters, though design'd
  For those who more will need 'em,
Are fill'd with hints, and interlined,
  Himself can hardly read 'em.

RHYME a b a b 

Each atom by some other struck,
  All turns and motions tries;
Till in a lump together stuck,
  Behold a poem rise:

RHYME a b a b 

Yet to the Dean his share allot;
  He claims it by a canon;
That without which a thing is not,
  Is _causa sine quâ non_.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus, Pope, in vain you boast your wit;
  For, had our deaf divine
Been for your conversation fit,
  You had not writ a line.

RHYME a b a b 

Of Sherlock, thus, for preaching framed
  The sexton reason'd well;
And justly half the merit claim'd,
  Because he rang the bell.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

By poets we are well assured
That love, alas! can ne'er be cured;
A complicated heap of ills,
Despising boluses and pills.
Ah! Chloe, this I find is true,
Since first I gave my heart to you.
Now, by your cruelty hard bound,
I strain my guts, my colon wound.
Now jealousy my grumbling tripes
Assaults with grating, grinding gripes.
When pity in those eyes I view,
My bowels wambling make me spew.
When I an amorous kiss design'd,
I belch'd a hurricane of wind.
Once you a gentle sigh let fall;
Remember how I suck'd it all;
What colic pangs from thence I felt,
Had you but known, your heart would melt,
Like ruffling winds in cavern pent,
Till Nature pointed out a vent.
How have you torn my heart to pieces
With maggots, humours, and caprices!
By which I got the hemorrhoids;
And loathsome worms my _anus_ voids.
Whene'er I hear a rival named,
I feel my body all inflamed;
Which, breaking out in boils and blains,
With yellow filth my linen stains;
Or, parch'd with unextinguish'd thirst,
Small-beer I guzzle till I burst;
And then I drag a bloated _corpus_,
Swell'd with a dropsy, like a porpus;
When, if I cannot purge or stale,
I must be tapp'd to fill a pail.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

Our schoolmaster may roar i' th' fit,
  Of classic beauty, _haec et illa_;
Not all his birch inspires such wit
  As th'ogling beams of Domitilla.

RHYME a b a b 

Let nobles toast, in bright champaign,
  Nymphs higher born than Domitilla;
I'll drink her health, again, again,
  In Berkeley's tar, or sars'parilla.

RHYME a b a b 

At Goodman's Fields I've much admired
  The postures strange of Monsieur Brilla;
But what are they to the soft step,
  The gliding air of Domitilla?

RHYME a b a b 

Virgil has eternized in song
  The flying footsteps of Camilla;
Sure, as a prophet, he was wrong;
  He might have dream'd of Domitilla.

RHYME a b c b 

Great Theodose condemn'd a town
  For thinking ill of his Placilla:
And deuce take London! if some knight
  O' th' city wed not Domitilla.

RHYME a b a b 

Wheeler, Sir George, in travels wise,
  Gives us a medal of Plantilla;
But O! the empress has not eyes,
  Nor lips, nor breast, like Domitilla.

RHYME a b a b 

Not all the wealth of plunder'd Italy,
  Piled on the mules of king At-tila,
Is worth one glove (I'll not tell a bit a lie)
  Or garter, snatch'd from Domitilla.

RHYME a b a b 

Five years a nymph at certain hamlet,
  Y-cleped Harrow of the Hill, a-
--bused much my heart, and was a damn'd let
  To verse--but now for Domitilla.

RHYME a b a b 

Dan Pope consigns Belinda's watch
  To the fair sylphid Momentilla,
And thus I offer up my catch
  To the snow-white hands of Domitilla.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Now the active young attorneys
Briskly travel on their journeys,
Looking big as any giants,
On the horses of their clients;
Like so many little Marses
With their tilters at their a--s,
Brazen-hilted, lately burnish'd,
And with harness-buckles furnish'd,
And with whips and spurs so neat,
And with jockey-coats complete,
And with boots so very greasy,
And with saddles eke so easy,
And with bridles fine and gay,
Bridles borrow'd for a day,
Bridles destined far to roam,
Ah! never, never to come home.
And with hats so very big, sir,
And with powder'd caps and wigs, sir,
And with ruffles to be shown,
Cambric ruffles not their own;
And with Holland shirts so white,
Shirts becoming to the sight,
Shirts bewrought with different letters,
As belonging to their betters.
With their pretty tinsel'd boxes,
Gotten from their dainty doxies,
And with rings so very trim,
Lately taken out of lim--
And with very little pence,
And as very little sense;
With some law, but little justice,
Having stolen from my hostess,
From the barber and the cutler,
Like the soldier from the sutler;
From the vintner and the tailor,
Like the felon from the jailor;
Into this and t'other county,
Living on the public bounty;
Thorough town and thorough village,
All to plunder, all to pillage:
Thorough mountains, thorough valleys,
Thorough stinking lanes and alleys,
Some to--kiss with farmers' spouses,
And make merry in their houses;
Some to tumble country wenches
On their rushy beds and benches;
And if they begin a fray,
Draw their swords, and----run away;
All to murder equity,
And to take a double fee;
Till the people are all quiet,
And forget to broil and riot,
Low in pocket, cow'd in courage,
Safely glad to sup their porridge,
And vacation's over--then,
Hey, for London town again.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

The life of man to represent,
  And turn it all to ridicule,
Wit did a puppet-show invent,
  Where the chief actor is a fool.

RHYME a b a b 

The gods of old were logs of wood,
  And worship was to puppets paid;
In antic dress the idol stood,
  And priest and people bow'd the head.

RHYME a b a b 

No wonder then, if art began
  The simple votaries to frame,
To shape in timber foolish man,
  And consecrate the block to fame.

RHYME a b a b 

From hence poetic fancy learn'd
  That trees might rise from human forms;
The body to a trunk be turn'd,
  And branches issue from the arms.

RHYME a b a b 

Thus Dædalus and Ovid too,
  That man's a blockhead, have confest:
Powel and Stretch the hint pursue;
  Life is a farce, the world a jest.

RHYME a b a b 

The same great truth South Sea has proved
  On that famed theatre, the alley;
Where thousands, by directors moved
  Are now sad monuments of folly.

RHYME a b a b 

What Momus was of old to Jove,
  The same a Harlequin is now;
The former was buffoon above,
  The latter is a Punch below.

RHYME a b a b 

This fleeting scene is but a stage,
  Where various images appear;
In different parts of youth and age,
  Alike the prince and peasant share.

RHYME a b a b 

Some draw our eyes by being great,
  False pomp conceals mere wood within;
And legislators ranged in state
  Are oft but wisdom in machine.

RHYME a b a b 

A stock may chance to wear a crown,
  And timber as a lord take place;
A statue may put on a frown,
  And cheat us with a thinking face.

RHYME a b a b 

Others are blindly led away,
  And made to act for ends unknown;
By the mere spring of wires they play,
  And speak in language not their own.

RHYME a b a b 

Too oft, alas! a scolding wife
  Usurps a jolly fellow's throne;
And many drink the cup of life,
  Mix'd and embitter'd by a Joan.

RHYME a b a b 

In short, whatever men pursue,
  Of pleasure, folly, war, or love:
This mimic race brings all to view:
  Alike they dress, they talk, they move.

RHYME a b a b 

Go on, great Stretch, with artful hand,
  Mortals to please and to deride;
And, when death breaks thy vital band,
  Thou shalt put on a puppet's pride.

RHYME a b a b 

Thou shalt in puny wood be shown,
  Thy image shall preserve thy fame;
Ages to come thy worth shall own,
  Point at thy limbs, and tell thy name.

RHYME a b a b 

Tell Tom, he draws a farce in vain,
  Before he looks in nature's glass;
Puns cannot form a witty scene,
  Nor pedantry for humour pass.

RHYME a b a b 

To make men act as senseless wood,
  And chatter in a mystic strain,
Is a mere force on flesh and blood,
  And shows some error in the brain.

RHYME a b a b 

He that would thus refine on thee,
  And turn thy stage into a school,
The jest of Punch will ever be,
  And stand confest the greater fool.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

SIR, 'twas a most unfriendly part
In you, who ought to know my heart,
Are well acquainted with my zeal
For all the female commonweal--
How could it come into your mind
To pitch on me, of all mankind,
Against the sex to write a satire,
And brand me for a woman-hater?
On me, who think them all so fair,
They rival Venus to a hair;
Their virtues never ceased to sing,
Since first I learn'd to tune a string?
Methinks I hear the ladies cry,
Will he his character belie?
Must never our misfortunes end?
And have we lost our only friend?
Ah, lovely nymphs! remove your fears,
No more let fall those precious tears.

RHYME a a *

The hound be hunted by the hare,
Than I turn rebel to the fair.
  'Twas you engaged me first to write,
Then gave the subject out of spite:
The journal of a modern dame,
Is, by my promise, what you claim.
My word is past, I must submit;
And yet perhaps you may be bit.
I but transcribe; for not a line
Of all the satire shall be mine.
Compell'd by you to tag in rhymes
The common slanders of the times,
Of modern times, the guilt is yours,
And me my innocence secures.
Unwilling Muse, begin thy lay,
The annals of a female day.

RHYME a a *

  By nature turn'd to play the rake well,
(As we shall show you in the sequel,)
The modern dame is waked by noon,
(Some authors say not quite so soon,)
Because, though sore against her will,
She sat all night up at quadrille.
She stretches, gapes, unglues her eyes,
And asks if it be time to rise;
Of headache and the spleen complains;
And then, to cool her heated brains,
Her night-gown and her slippers brought her,
Takes a large dram of citron water.
Then to her glass; and, "Betty, pray,
Don't I look frightfully to-day?
But was it not confounded hard?
Well, if I ever touch a card!
Four matadores, and lose codille!
Depend upon't, I never will.
But run to Tom, and bid him fix
The ladies here to-night by six."
"Madam, the goldsmith waits below;
He says, his business is to know
If you'll redeem the silver cup
He keeps in pawn?"--"Why, show him up."
"Your dressing-plate he'll be content
To take, for interest _cent. per cent._
And, madam, there's my Lady Spade
Has sent this letter by her maid."
"Well, I remember what she won;
And has she sent so soon to dun?
Here, carry down these ten pistoles
My husband left to pay for coals:
I thank my stars they all are light,
And I may have revenge to-night."
Now, loitering o'er her tea and cream,
She enters on her usual theme;
Her last night's ill success repeats,
Calls Lady Spade a hundred cheats:
"She slipt spadillo in her breast,
Then thought to turn it to a jest:
There's Mrs. Cut and she combine,
And to each other give the sign."
Through every game pursues her tale,
Like hunters o'er their evening ale.

RHYME a a *

  Now to another scene give place:
Enter the folks with silks and lace:
Fresh matter for a world of chat,
Right Indian this, right Mechlin that:
"Observe this pattern--there's a stuff;
I can have customers enough.
Dear madam, you are grown so hard--
This lace is worth twelve pounds a-yard:
Madam, if there be truth in man,
I never sold so cheap a fan."
  This business of importance o'er,
And madam almost dress'd by four;
The footman, in his usual phrase,
Comes up with, "Madam, dinner stays."
She answers, in her usual style,
"The cook must keep it back a while;
I never can have time to dress,
No woman breathing takes up less;
I'm hurried so, it makes me sick;
I wish the dinner at Old Nick."
At table now she acts her part,
Has all the dinner cant by heart:
"I thought we were to dine alone,
My dear; for sure, if I had known
This company would come to-day--
But really 'tis my spouse's way!
He's so unkind, he never sends
To tell when he invites his friends:
I wish ye may but have enough!"
And while with all this paltry stuff
She sits tormenting every guest,
Nor gives her tongue one moment's rest,
In phrases batter'd, stale, and trite,
Which modern ladies call polite;
You see the booby husband sit
In admiration at her wit!

RHYME a a *

  But let me now a while survey
Our madam o'er her evening tea;
Surrounded with her noisy clans
Of prudes, coquettes, and harridans,
When, frighted at the clamorous crew,
Away the God of Silence flew,
And fair Discretion left the place,
And modesty with blushing face;
Now enters overweening Pride,
And Scandal, ever gaping wide,
Hypocrisy with frown severe,
Scurrility with gibing air;
Rude laughter seeming like to burst,
And Malice always judging worst;
And Vanity with pocket glass,
And Impudence with front of brass;
And studied Affectation came,
Each limb and feature out of frame;
While Ignorance, with brain of lead,
Flew hovering o'er each female head.
  Why should I ask of thee, my Muse,
A hundred tongues, as poets use,
When, to give every dame her due,
A hundred thousand were too few?
Or how should I, alas! relate
The sum of all their senseless prate,
Their innuendoes, hints, and slanders,
Their meanings lewd, and double entendres?
Now comes the general scandal charge;
What some invent, the rest enlarge;
And, "Madam, if it be a lie,
You have the tale as cheap as I;
I must conceal my author's name:
But now 'tis known to common fame."
  Say, foolish females, bold and blind,
Say, by what fatal turn of mind,
Are you on vices most severe,
Wherein yourselves have greatest share?
Thus every fool herself deludes;
The prude condemns the absent prudes:
Mopsa, who stinks her spouse to death,
Accuses Chloe's tainted breath;
Hircina, rank with sweat, presumes
To censure Phyllis for perfumes;
While crooked Cynthia, sneering, says,
That Florimel wears iron stays;
Chloe, of every coxcomb jealous,
Admires how girls can talk with fellows;
And, full of indignation, frets,
That women should be such coquettes:
Iris, for scandal most notorious,
Cries, "Lord, the world is so censorious!"
And Rufa, with her combs of lead,
Whispers that Sappho's hair is red:
Aura, whose tongue you hear a mile hence,
Talks half a day in praise of silence;
And Sylvia, full of inward guilt,
Calls Amoret an arrant jilt.

RHYME a a *

  Now voices over voices rise,
While each to be the loudest vies:
They contradict, affirm, dispute,
No single tongue one moment mute;
All mad to speak, and none to hearken,
They set the very lap-dog barking;
Their chattering makes a louder din
Than fishwives o'er a cup of gin;
Not schoolboys at a barring out
Raised ever such incessant rout;
The jumbling particles of matter
In chaos made not such a clatter;
Far less the rabble roar and rail,
When drunk with sour election ale.
  Nor do they trust their tongues alone,
But speak a language of their own;
Can read a nod, a shrug, a look,
Far better than a printed book;
Convey a libel in a frown,
And wink a reputation down;
Or by the tossing of the fan,
Describe the lady and the man.
  But see, the female club disbands,
Each twenty visits on her hands.
Now all alone poor madam sits
In vapours and hysteric fits;
"And was not Tom this morning sent?
I'd lay my life he never went;
Past six, and not a living soul!
I might by this have won a vole."
A dreadful interval of spleen!
How shall we pass the time between?
"Here, Betty, let me take my drops;
And feel my pulse, I know it stops;
This head of mine, lord, how it swims!
And such a pain in all my limbs!"
"Dear madam, try to take a nap"--
But now they hear a footman's rap:
"Go, run, and light the ladies up:
It must be one before we sup."
  The table, cards, and counters, set,
And all the gamester ladies met,
Her spleen and fits recover'd quite,
Our madam can sit up all night;
"Whoever comes, I'm not within."
Quadrille's the word, and so begin.

RHYME a a *

  How can the Muse her aid impart,
Unskill'd in all the terms of art?
Or in harmonious numbers put
The deal, the shuffle, and the cut?
The superstitious whims relate,
That fill a female gamester's pate?
What agony of soul she feels
To see a knave's inverted heels!
She draws up card by card, to find
Good fortune peeping from behind;
With panting heart, and earnest eyes,
In hope to see spadillo rise;
In vain, alas! her hope is fed;
She draws an ace, and sees it red;
In ready counters never pays,
But pawns her snuff-box, rings, and keys;
Ever with some new fancy struck,
Tries twenty charms to mend her luck.
"This morning, when the parson came,
I said I should not win a game.
This odious chair, how came I stuck in't?
I think I never had good luck in't.
I'm so uneasy in my stays:
Your fan, a moment, if you please.
Stand farther, girl, or get you gone;
I always lose when you look on."
"Lord! madam, you have lost codille:
I never saw you play so ill."
"Nay, madam, give me leave to say,
'Twas you that threw the game away:
When Lady Tricksey play'd a four,
You took it with a matadore;
I saw you touch your wedding ring
Before my lady call'd a king;
You spoke a word began with H,
And I know whom you meant to teach,
Because you held the king of hearts;
Fie, madam, leave these little arts."
"That's not so bad as one that rubs
Her chair to call the king of clubs;
And makes her partner understand
A matadore is in her hand."
"Madam, you have no cause to flounce,
I swear I saw you thrice renounce."
"And truly, madam, I know when
Instead of five you scored me ten.
Spadillo here has got a mark;
A child may know it in the dark:
I guess'd the hand: it seldom fails:
I wish some folks would pare their nails."

RHYME a a *

  While thus they rail, and scold, and storm,
It passes but for common form:
But, conscious that they all speak true,
And give each other but their due,
It never interrupts the game,
Or makes them sensible of shame.
  The time too precious now to waste,
The supper gobbled up in haste;
Again afresh to cards they run,
As if they had but just begun.
But I shall not again repeat,
How oft they squabble, snarl, and cheat.
At last they hear the watchman knock,
"A frosty morn--past four o'clock."
The chairmen are not to be found,
"Come, let us play the other round."
  Now all in haste they huddle on
Their hoods, their cloaks, and get them gone;
But, first, the winner must invite
The company to-morrow night.
  Unlucky madam, left in tears,
(Who now again quadrille forswears,)
With empty purse, and aching head,
Steals to her sleeping spouse to bed.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

Logicians have but ill defined
As rational, the human kind;
Reason, they say, belongs to man,
But let them prove it if they can.
Wise Aristotle and Smiglesius,
By ratiocinations specious,
Have strove to prove, with great precision,
With definition and division,
_Homo est ratione praeditum;_
But for my soul I cannot credit 'em,
And must, in spite of them, maintain,
That man and all his ways are vain;
And that this boasted lord of nature
Is both a weak and erring creature;
That instinct is a surer guide
Than reason, boasting mortals' pride;
And that brute beasts are far before 'em.
_Deus est anima brutorum._

RHYME a a *

Whoever knew an honest brute
At law his neighbour prosecute,
Bring action for assault or battery,
Or friend beguile with lies and flattery?
O'er plains they ramble unconfined,
No politics disturb their mind;
They eat their meals, and take their sport
Nor know who's in or out at court.
They never to the levee go
To treat, as dearest friend, a foe:
They never importune his grace,
Nor ever cringe to men in place:
Nor undertake a dirty job,
Nor draw the quill to write for Bob.
Fraught with invective, they ne'er go
To folks at Paternoster Row.
No judges, fiddlers, dancing-masters,
No pickpockets, or poetasters,
Are known to honest quadrupeds;
No single brute his fellow leads.
Brutes never meet in bloody fray,
Nor cut each other's throats for pay.
Of beasts, it is confess'd, the ape
Comes nearest us in human shape;
Like man, he imitates each fashion,
And malice is his lurking passion:
But, both in malice and grimaces,
A courtier any ape surpasses.
Behold him, humbly cringing, wait
Upon the minister of state;
View him soon after to inferiors
Aping the conduct of superiors;
He promises with equal air,
And to perform takes equal care.
He in his turn finds imitators,
At court, the porters, lacqueys, waiters,
Their masters' manner still contract,
And footmen, lords and dukes can act.
Thus, at the court, both great and small
Behave alike, for all ape all.

RHYME a a *

Ere bribes convince you whom to choose,
The precepts of Lord Coke peruse.
Observe an elephant, says he,
And let him like your member be:
First take a man that's free from _Gaul_,
For elephants have none at all;
In flocks or parties he must keep;
For elephants live just like sheep.
Stubborn in honour he must be;
For elephants ne'er bend the knee.
Last, let his memory be sound,
In which your elephant's profound;
That old examples from the wise
May prompt him in his noes and ayes.
  Thus the Lord Coke hath gravely writ,
In all the form of lawyer's wit:
And then, with Latin and all that,
Shows the comparison is pat.
Yet in some points my lord is wrong,
One's teeth are sold, and t'other's tongue:
Now, men of parliament, God knows,
Are more like elephants of shows;
Whose docile memory and sense
Are turn'd to trick, to gather pence;
To get their master half-a-crown,
They spread the flag, or lay it down:
Those who bore bulwarks on their backs,
And guarded nations from attacks,
Now practise every pliant gesture,
Opening their trunk for every tester.
Siam, for elephants so famed,
Is not with England to be named:
Their elephants by men are sold;
Ours sell themselves, and take the gold.

RHYME a a *

Lindsay mistakes the matter quite,
And honest Paulus judges right.
Then, why these quarrels to the sun,
Without whose aid you're all undone?
Did Paulus e'er complain of sweat?
Did Paulus e'er the sun forget;
The influence of whose golden beams
Soon licks up all unsavoury steams?
The sun, you say, his face has kiss'd:
It has; but then it greased his fist.
True lawyers, for the wisest ends,
Have always been Apollo's friends.
Not for his superficial powers
Of ripening fruits, and gilding flowers;
Not for inspiring poets' brains
With penniless and starveling strains;
Not for his boasted healing art;
Not for his skill to shoot the dart;
Nor yet because he sweetly fiddles;
Nor for his prophecies in riddles:
But for a more substantial cause--
Apollo's patron of the laws;
Whom Paulus ever must adore,
As parent of the golden ore,
By Phoebus, an incestuous birth,
Begot upon his grandam Earth;
By Phoebus first produced to light;
By Vulcan form'd so round and bright:
Then offer'd at the shrine of Justice,
By clients to her priests and trustees.
Nor, when we see Astraea stand
With even balance in her hand,
Must we suppose she has in view,
How to give every man his due;
Her scales you see her only hold,
To weigh her priests' the lawyers' gold.
  Now, should I own your case was grievous,
Poor sweaty Paulus, who'd believe us?
'Tis very true, and none denies,
At least, that such complaints are wise:

RHYME a a *

'Tis wise, no doubt, as clients fat you more,
To cry, like statesmen, _Quanta patimur!_
But, since the truth must needs be stretched
To prove that lawyers are so wretched,
This paradox I'll undertake,
For Paulus' and for Lindsay's sake;
By topics, which, though I abomine 'em,
May serve as arguments _ad hominem_:
Yet I disdain to offer those
Made use of by detracting foes.
  I own the curses of mankind
Sit light upon a lawyer's mind:
The clamours of ten thousand tongues
Break not his rest, nor hurt his lungs;
I own, his conscience always free,
(Provided he has got his fee,)
Secure of constant peace within,
He knows no guilt, who knows no sin.
  Yet well they merit to be pitied,
By clients always overwitted.
And though the gospel seems to say,
What heavy burdens lawyers lay
Upon the shoulders of their neighbour,
Nor lend a finger to their labour,
Always for saving their own bacon;
No doubt, the text is here mistaken:
The copy's false, the sense is rack'd:
To prove it, I appeal to fact;
And thus by demonstration show
What burdens lawyers undergo.
  With early clients at his door,
Though he was drunk the night before,
And crop-sick, with unclubb'd-for wine,
The wretch must be at court by nine;
Half sunk beneath his briefs and bag,
As ridden by a midnight hag;
Then, from the bar, harangues the bench,
In English vile, and viler French,
And Latin, vilest of the three;
And all for poor ten moidores fee!
Of paper how is he profuse,
With periods long, in terms abstruse!
What pains he takes to be prolix!
A thousand lines to stand for six!
Of common sense without a word in!
And is not this a grievous burden?

RHYME a a *

  The lawyer is a common drudge,
To fight our cause before the judge:
And, what is yet a greater curse,
Condemn'd to bear his client's purse:
While he at ease, secure and light,
Walks boldly home at dead of night;
When term is ended, leaves the town,
Trots to his country mansion down;
And, disencumber'd of his load,
No danger dreads upon the road;
Despises rapparees, and rides
Safe through the Newry mountains' sides.
  Lindsay, 'tis you have set me on,
To state this question _pro_ and _con_.
My satire may offend, 'tis true;
However, it concerns not you.
I own, there may, in every clan,
Perhaps, be found one honest man;
Yet link them close, in this they jump,
To be but rascals in the lump.
Imagine Lindsay at the bar,
He's much the same his brethren are;
Well taught by practice to imbibe
The fundamentals of his tribe:
And in his client's just defence,
Must deviate oft from common sense;
And make his ignorance discern'd,
To get the name of counsel-learn'd,
(As _lucus_ comes _a non lucendo_,)
And wisely do as other men do:
But shift him to a better scene,
Among his crew of rogues in grain;
Surrounded with companions fit,
To taste his humour, sense, and wit;
You'd swear he never took a fee,
Nor knew in law his A, B, C.

RHYME a a *

  'Tis hard, where dulness overrules,
To keep good sense in crowds of fools.
And we admire the man, who saves
His honesty in crowds of knaves;
Nor yields up virtue at discretion,
To villains of his own profession.
Lindsay, you know what pains you take
In both, yet hardly save your stake;
And will you venture both anew,
To sit among that venal crew,
That pack of mimic legislators,
Abandon'd, stupid, slavish praters?
For as the rabble daub and rifle
The fool who scrambles for a trifle;
Who for his pains is cuff'd and kick'd,
Drawn through the dirt, his pockets pick'd;
You must expect the like disgrace,
Scrambling with rogues to get a place;
Must lose the honour you have gain'd,
Your numerous virtues foully stain'd:
Disclaim for ever all pretence
To common honesty and sense;
And join in friendship with a strict tie,
To M--l, C--y, and Dick Tighe.

RHYME a a *

Since there are persons who complain
There's too much satire in my vein;
That I am often found exceeding
The rules of raillery and breeding;
With too much freedom treat my betters,
Not sparing even men of letters:
You, who are skill'd in lawyers' lore,
What's your advice? Shall I give o'er?
Nor ever fools or knaves expose,
Either in verse or humorous prose:
And to avoid all future ill,
In my scrutoire lock up my quill?

RHYME a a *

  Since you are pleased to condescend
To ask the judgment of a friend,
Your case consider'd, I must think
You should withdraw from pen and ink,
Forbear your poetry and jokes,
And live like other Christian folks;
Or if the Muses must inspire
Your fancy with their pleasing fire,
Take subjects safer for your wit
Than those on which you lately writ.
Commend the times, your thoughts correct,
And follow the prevailing sect;
Assert that Hyde, in writing story,
Shows all the malice of a Tory;
While Burnet, in his deathless page,
Discovers freedom without rage.
To Woolston recommend our youth,
For learning, probity, and truth;
That noble genius, who unbinds
The chains which fetter freeborn minds;
Redeems us from the slavish fears
Which lasted near two thousand years;
He can alone the priesthood humble,
Make gilded spires and altars tumble.

RHYME a a *

  Must I commend against my conscience,
Such stupid blasphemy and nonsense;
To such a subject tune my lyre,
And sing like one of Milton's choir,
Where devils to a vale retreat,
And call the laws of Wisdom, Fate;
Lament upon their hapless fall,
That Force free Virtue should enthrall?
Or shall the charms of Wealth and Power
Make me pollute the Muses' bower?

RHYME a a *

  As from the tripod of Apollo,
Hear from my desk the words that follow:
"Some, by philosophers misled,
Must honour you alive and dead;
And such as know what Greece has writ,
Must taste your irony and wit;
While most that are, or would be great,
Must dread your pen, your person hate;
And you on Drapier's hill must lie,
And there without a mitre die."

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  In youth from rock to rock I went
  From hill to hill, in discontent
  Of pleasure high and turbulent,
          Most pleas'd when most uneasy;
  But now my own delights I make,
  My thirst at every rill can slake,
  And gladly Nature's love partake
          Of thee, sweet Daisy!

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  When soothed a while by milder airs,
  Thee Winter in the garland wears                     
  That thinly shades his few grey hairs;
           Spring cannot shun thee;
  Whole summer fields are thine by right;
  And Autumn, melancholy Wight!
  Doth in thy crimson head delight
           When rains are on thee.

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  In shoals and bands, a morrice train,
  Thou greet'st the Traveller in the lane;
  If welcome once thou count'st it gain;
           Thou art not daunted,                       
  Nor car'st if thou be set at naught;
  And oft alone in nooks remote
  We meet thee, like a pleasant thought,
           When such are wanted.

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  Be Violets in their secret mews
  The flowers the wanton Zephyrs chuse;
  Proud be the Rose, with rains and dews
          Her head impearling;
  Thou liv'st with less ambitious aim,
  Yet hast not gone without thy fame;                  
  Thou art indeed by many a claim
          The Poet's darling.

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  If to a rock from rains he fly,
  Or, some bright day of April sky,
  Imprison'd by hot sunshine lie
          Near the green holly,
  And wearily at length should fare;
  He need but look about, and there
  Thou art! a Friend at hand, to scare
          His melancholy.                              

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  A hundred times, by rock or bower,
  Ere thus I have lain couch'd an hour,
  Have I derived from thy sweet power
          Some apprehension;
  Some steady love; some brief delight;
  Some memory that had taken flight;
  Some chime of fancy wrong or right;
          Or stray invention.

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  If stately passions in me burn,
  And one chance look to Thee should turn,             
  I drink out of an humbler urn
          A lowlier pleasure;
  The homely sympathy that heeds
  The common life, our nature breeds;
  A wisdom fitted to the needs
          Of hearts at leisure.

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  When, smitten by the morning ray,
  I see thee rise alert and gay,
  Then, chearful Flower! my spirits play
          With kindred motion:                         
  At dusk, I've seldom mark'd thee press
  The ground, as if in thankfulness,
  Without some feeling, more or less,
          Of true devotion.

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  And all day long I number yet,
  All seasons through, another debt,
  Which I wherever thou art met,
          To thee am owing;
  An instinct call it, a blind sense;
  A happy, genial influence,                           
  Coming one knows not how nor whence,
          Nor whither going.

RHYME a a a b c c c b 

  Child of the Year! that round dost run
  Thy course, bold lover of the sun,
  And chearful when the day's begun
          As morning Leveret,
  Thou long the Poet's praise shalt gain;
  Thou wilt be more belov'd by men
  In times to come; thou not in vain
          Art Nature's Favorite.                        

TITLE

RHYME a a b c c b 

  I met Louisa in the shade;
  And, having seen that lovely Maid,
  Why should I fear to say
  That she is ruddy, fleet, and strong;
  And down the rocks can leap along,
  Like rivulets in May?

RHYME a a b c c b 

  And she hath smiles to earth unknown;
  Smiles, that with motion of their own
  Do spread, and sink, and rise;
  That come and go with endless play,                  
  And ever, as they pass away,
  Are hidden in her eyes.

RHYME a a b c c b 

  She loves her fire, her Cottage-home;
  Yet o'er the moorland will she roam
  In weather rough and bleak;
  And when against the wind she strains,
  Oh! might I kiss the mountain rains
  That sparkle on her cheek.

RHYME a a b c c b 

  Take all that's mine 'beneath the moon',
  If I with her but half a noon                        
  May sit beneath the walls
  Of some old cave, or mossy nook,
  When up she winds along the brook,
  To hunt the waterfalls.

TITLE

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  A barking sound the Shepherd hears,
  A cry as of a Dog or Fox;
  He halts, and searches with his eyes
  Among the scatter'd rocks:
  And now at distance can discern
  A stirring in a brake of fern;
  From which immediately leaps out
  A Dog, and yelping runs about.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  The Dog is not of mountain breed;
  It's motions, too, are wild and shy;                  
  With something, as the Shepherd thinks,
  Unusual in its' cry:
  Nor is there any one in sight
  All round, in Hollow or on Height;
  Nor shout, nor whistle strikes his ear;
  What is the Creature doing here?

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  It was a Cove, a huge Recess,
  That keeps till June December's snow;
  A lofty Precipice in front,
  A silent Tarn [a ] below!                              
  Far in the bosom of Helvellyn,
  Remote from public Road or Dwelling,
  Pathway, or cultivated land;
  From trace of human foot or hand.

RHYME a b c b d d e e e 

  There, sometimes does a leaping Fish
  Send through the Tarn a lonely chear;
  The Crags repeat the Raven's croak,
  In symphony austere;
  Thither the Rainbow comes, the Cloud;
  And Mists that spread the flying shroud;             
  And Sun-beams; and the sounding blast,
  That, if it could, would hurry past,
  But that enormous Barrier binds it fast.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  Not knowing what to think, a while
  The Shepherd stood: then makes his way
  Towards the Dog, o'er rocks and stones,
  As quickly as he may;
  Nor far had gone before he found
  A human skeleton on the ground,
  Sad sight! the Shepherd with a sigh                  
  Looks round, to learn the history.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  From those abrupt and perilous rocks,
  The Man had fallen, that place of fear!
  At length upon the Shepherd's mind
  It breaks, and all is clear:
  He instantly recall'd the Name,
  And who he was, and whence he came;
  Remember'd, too, the very day
  On which the Traveller pass'd this way.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  But hear a wonder now, for sake                      
  Of which this mournful Tale I tell!
  A lasting monument of words
  This wonder merits well.
  The Dog, which still was hovering nigh,
  Repeating the same timid cry,
  This Dog had been through three months' space
  A Dweller in that savage place.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  Yes, proof was plain that since the day
  On which the Traveller thus had died
  The Dog had watch'd about the spot,                  
  Or by his Master's side:
  How nourish'd here through such long time
  He knows, who gave that love sublime,
  And gave that strength of feeling, great
  Above all human estimate.

TITLE

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

  She was a Phantom of delight
  When first she gleam'd upon my sight;
  A lovely Apparition, sent
  To be a moment's ornament;
  Her eyes as stars of Twilight fair;
  Like Twilight's, too, her dusky hair;
  But all things else about her drawn
  From May-time and the chearful Dawn;
  A dancing Shape, an Image gay,
  To haunt, to startle, and way-lay.                   

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

  I saw her upon nearer view,
  A Spirit, yet a Woman too!
  Her household motions light and free,
  And steps of virgin liberty;
  A countenance in which did meet
  Sweet records, promises as sweet;
  A Creature not too bright or good
  For human nature's daily food;
  For transient sorrows, simple wiles,
  Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles.      

RHYME a a b b c c d d e e 

  And now I see with eye serene
  The very pulse of the machine;
  A Being breathing thoughtful breath;
  A Traveller betwixt life and death;
  The reason firm, the temperate will,
  Endurance, foresight, strength and skill;
  A perfect Woman; nobly plann'd,
  To warn, to comfort, and command;
  And yet a Spirit still, and bright
  With something of an angel light.                    

TITLE

RHYME a a b c b c d d e e f g g f 

  Art thou the Bird whom Man loves best,
  The pious Bird with the scarlet breast,
      Our little English Robin;
  The Bird that comes about our doors
  When Autumn winds are sobbing?
  Art thou the Peter of Norway Boors?
      Their Thomas in Finland,
      And Russia far inland?
  The Bird, whom by some name or other
  All men who know thee call their Brother,            
  The Darling of Children and men?
  Could Father Adam open his eyes,
  And see this sight beneath the skies,
  He'd wish to close them again.

TITLE

RHYME a a b b c d e f d f e 

  If the Butterfly knew but his friend
  Hither his flight he would bend,
  And find his way to me	
  Under the branches of the tree:
  In and out, he darts about;	
  His little heart is throbbing:                     
  Can this be the Bird, to man so good,
      Our consecrated Robin!	
  That, after their bewildering,
  Did cover with leaves the little children,f 
      So painfully in the wood?	

TITLE

RHYME a b b c c a 

  What ail'd thee Robin that thou could'st pursue
      A beautiful Creature,
  That is gentle by nature?
  Beneath the summer sky
  From flower to flower let him fly;                   
  'Tis all that he wishes to do.

TITLE

RHYME a a b c c d d e d d e 

  The Chearer Thou of our in-door sadness,
  He is the Friend of our summer gladness:
  What hinders, then, that ye should be
  Playmates in the sunny weather,
  And fly about in the air together?
  Like the hues of thy breast
  His beautiful wings in crimson are drest,
  A brother he seems of thine own:
  If thou would'st be happy in thy nest,               
  O pious Bird! whom Man loves best,
  Love him, or leave him alone!

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

    One morning (raw it was and wet,
    A foggy day in winter time)
    A Woman in the road I met,
    Not old, though something past her prime:
    Majestic in her person, tall and straight;
  And like a Roman matron's was her mien and gait.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    The ancient Spirit is not dead;
    Old times, thought I, are breathing there;
    Proud was I that my country bred
    Such strength, a dignity so fair:                  
    She begg'd an alms, like one in poor estate;
  I look'd at her again, nor did my pride abate.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    When from these lofty thoughts I woke,
    With the first word I had to spare
    I said to her, "Beneath your Cloak
    What's that which on your arm you bear?"
    She answer'd soon as she the question heard,
  "A simple burthen, Sir, a little Singing-bird."

RHYME a b a b c c 

    And, thus continuing, she said,
    "I had a Son, who many a day                       
    Sail'd on the seas; but he is dead;
    In Denmark he was cast away;
    And I have been as far as Hull, to see
  What clothes he might have left, or other property."

RHYME a b a b c c 

    "The Bird and Cage they both were his;
    'Twas my Son's Bird; and neat and trim
    He kept it: many voyages
    This Singing-bird hath gone with him;
    When last he sail'd he left the Bird behind;
  As it might be, perhaps, from bodings of his mind."  

RHYME a b a b c c 

    "He to a Fellow-lodger's care
    Had left it, to be watch'd and fed,
    Till he came back again; and there
    I found it when my Son was dead;
    And now, God help me for my little wit!
  I trail it with me, Sir! he took so much delight in it."

TITLE

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Pansies, Lilies, Kingcups, Daisies,
  Let them live upon their praises;
  Long as there's a sun that sets
  Primroses will have their glory;
  Long as there are Violets,
  They will have a place in story:
  There's a flower that shall be mine,
  'Tis the little Celandine.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Eyes of some men travel far
  For the finding of a star;                           
  Up and down the heavens they go,
  Men that keep a mighty rout!
  I'm as great as they, I trow,
  Since the day I found thee out,
  Little flower!--I'll make a stir
  Like a great Astronomer.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Modest, yet withal an Elf
  Bold, and lavish of thyself,
  Since we needs must first have met
  I have seen thee, high and low,                      
  Thirty years or more, and yet
  'Twas a face I did not know;
  Thou hast now, go where I may,
  Fifty greetings in a day.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Ere a leaf is on a bush,
  In the time before the Thrush
  Has a thought about it's nest,
  Thou wilt come with half a call,
  Spreading out thy glossy breast
  Like a careless Prodigal;                            
  Telling tales about the sun,
  When we've little warmth, or none.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Poets, vain men in their mood!
  Travel with the multitude;
  Never heed them; I aver
  That they all are wanton Wooers;
  But the thrifty Cottager,
  Who stirs little out of doors,
  Joys to spy thee near her home,
  Spring is coming, Thou art come!                     

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Comfort have thou of thy merit,
  Kindly, unassuming Spirit!
  Careless of thy neighbourhood,
  Thou dost shew thy pleasant face
  On the moor, and in the wood.
  In the lane--there's not a place,
  Howsoever mean it be,
  But 'tis good enough for thee.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Ill befal the yellow Flowers,
  Children of the flaring hours!                       
  Buttercups, that will be seen,
  Whether we will see or no;
  Others, too, of lofty mien;
  They have done as worldlings do,
  Taken praise that should be thine,
  Little, humble Celandine!

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Prophet of delight and mirth,
  Scorn'd and slighted upon earth!
  Herald of a mighty band,
  Of a joyous train ensuing,                           
  Singing at my heart's command,
  In the lanes my thoughts pursuing,
  I will sing, as doth behove,
  Hymns in praise of what I love!

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Pleasures newly found are sweet
  When they lie about our feet:
  February last my heart
  First at sight of thee was glad;
  All unheard of as thou art,
  Thou must needs, I think, have had,
  Celandine! and long ago,
  Praise of which I nothing know.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  I have not a doubt but he,
  Whosoe'er the man might be,                          
  Who the first with pointed rays,
  (Workman worthy to be sainted)
  Set the Sign-board in a blaze,
  When the risen sun he painted,
  Took the fancy from a glance
  At thy glittering countenance.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Soon as gentle breezes bring
  News of winter's vanishing,
  And the children build their bowers,
  Sticking 'kerchief-plots of mold                     
  All about with full-blown flowers,
  Thick as sheep in shepherd's fold!
  With the proudest Thou art there,
  Mantling in the tiny square.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Often have I sigh'd to measure
  By myself a lonely pleasure;
  Sigh'd to think, I read a book
  Only read perhaps by me;
  Yet I long could overlook
  Thy bright coronet and Thee,                         
  And thy arch and wily ways,
  And thy store of other praise.

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Blithe of heart, from week to week
  Thou dost play at hide-and-seek;
  While the patient Primrose sits
  Like a Beggar in the cold,
  Thou, a Flower of wiser wits,
  Slipp'st into thy shelter'd hold:
  Bright as any of the train
  When ye all are out again.                           

RHYME a a b c b c d d 

  Thou art not beyond the moon,
  But a thing "beneath our shoon;"
  Let, as old Magellen did,
  Others roam about the sea;
  Build who will a pyramid;
  Praise it is enough for me,
  If there be but three or four
  Who will love my little Flower.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  Who is the happy Warrior? Who is he
  Whom every Man in arms should wish to be?

RHYME a a a 

  --It is the generous Spirit, who, when brought
  Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought
  Upon the plan that pleased his childish thought:

RHYME a a *

  Whose high endeavours are an inward light
  That make the path before him always bright:
  Who, with a natural instinct to discern
  What knowledge can perform, is diligent to learn
  Abides by this resolve, and stops not there,         
  But makes his moral being his prime care;

RHYME a a a 

  Who, doom'd to go in company with Pain,
  And Fear, and Bloodshed, miserable train!
  Turns his necessity to glorious gain;

RHYME a a *

  In face of these doth exercise a power
  Which is our human-nature's highest dower;
  Controls them and subdues, transmutes, bereaves
  Of their bad influence, and their good receives;
  By objects, which might force the soul to abate
  Her feeling, render'd more compassionate;            
  Is placable because occasions rise
  So often that demand such sacrifice;
  More skilful in self-knowledge, even more pure,
  As tempted more; more able to endure,
  As more expos'd to suffering and distress;
  Thence, also, more alive to tenderness.
  Tis he whose law is reason; who depends
  Upon that law as on the best of friends;
  Whence, in a state where men are tempted still
  To evil for a guard against worse ill,               
  And what in quality or act is best
  Doth seldom on a right foundation rest,
  He fixes good on good alone, and owes
  To virtue every triumph that he knows:
  --Who, if he rise to station of command,
  Rises by open means; and there will stand
  On honourable terms, or else retire,
  And in himself possess his own desire;
  Who comprehends his trust, and to the same
  Keeps faithful with a singleness of aim;             
  And therefore does not stoop, nor lie in wait
  For wealth, or honors, or for worldly state;
  Whom they must follow; on whose head must fall,
  Like showers of manna, if they come at all:
  Whose powers shed round him in the common strife,
  Or mild concerns of ordinary life,
  A constant influence, a peculiar grace;
  But who, if he be called upon to face
  Some awful moment to which heaven has join'd
  Great issues, good or bad for human-kind,            
  Is happy as a Lover; and attired
  With sudden brightness like a Man inspired;
  And through the heat of conflict keeps the law
  In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw;
  Or if an unexpected call succeed,
  Come when it will, is equal to the need:
  --He who, though thus endued as with a sense
  And faculty for storm and turbulence,
  Is yet a Soul whose master bias leans
  To home-felt pleasures and to gentle scenes;         
  Sweet images! which, wheresoe'er he be,
  Are at his heart; and such fidelity
  It is his darling passion to approve;
  More brave for this, that he hath much to love:

RHYME a a a 

  'Tis, finally, the Man, who, lifted high,
  Conspicuous object in a Nation's eye,
  Or left unthought-of in obscurity,

RHYME a a *

  Who, with a toward or untoward lot,
  Prosperous or adverse, to his wish or not,
  Plays, in the many games of life, that one           
  Where what he most doth value must be won;
  Whom neither shape of danger can dismay,
  Nor thought of tender happiness betray;

RHYME a a a 

  Who, not content that former worth stand fast,
  Looks forward, persevering to the last,
  From well to better, daily self-surpast:

RHYME a a *

  Who, whether praise of him must walk the earth
  For ever, and to noble deeds give birth,
  Or He must go to dust without his fame,
  And leave a dead unprofitable name,                  

RHYME a a a 

  Finds comfort in himself and in his cause;
  And, while the mortal mist is gathering, draws
  His breath in confidence of Heaven's applause;

RHYME a a 

  This is the happy Warrior; this is He
  Whom every Man in arms should wish to be.

TITLE

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  When the Brothers reach'd the gateway,
  Eustace pointed with his lance
  To the Horn which there was hanging;
  Horn of the inheritance.
  Horn it was which none could sound,
  No one upon living ground,
  Save He who came as rightful Heir
  To Egremont's Domains and Castle fair.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  Heirs from ages without record
  Had the House of Lucie born,                         
  Who of right had claim'd the Lordship
  By the proof upon the Horn:
  Each at the appointed hour
  Tried the Horn, it own'd his power;
  He was acknowledged: and the blast
  Which good Sir Eustace sounded was the last.

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  With his lance Sir Eustace pointed,
  And to Hubert thus said he,
  "What I speak this Horn shall witness
  For thy better memory.                               
  Hear, then, and neglect me not!
  At this time, and on this spot,
  The words are utter'd from my heart,
  As my last earnest prayer ere we depart."

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  "On good service we are going
  Life to risk by sea and land;
  In which course if Christ our Saviour
  Do my sinful soul demand,
  Hither come thou back straightway,
  Hubert, if alive that day;                           
  Return, and sound the Horn, that we
  May have a living House still left in thee!"

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  "Fear not," quickly answer'd Hubert;
  "As I am thy Father's son,
  What thou askest, noble Brother,
  With God's favour shall be done."
  So were both right well content:
  From the Castle forth they went.
  And at the head of their Array
  To Palestine the Brothers took their way.            

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  Side by side they fought (the Lucies
  Were a line for valour fam'd)
  And where'er their strokes alighted
  There the Saracens were tam'd.
  Whence, then, could it come the thought,
  By what evil spirit brought?
  Oh! can a brave Man wish to take
  His Brother's life, for Land's and Castle's sake?

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  "Sir!" the Ruffians said to Hubert,
  "Deep he lies in Jordan flood."--                    
  Stricken by this ill assurance,
  Pale and trembling Hubert stood.
  "Take your earnings."--Oh! that I
  Could have seen my Brother die!
  It was a pang that vex'd him then;
  And oft returned, again, and yet again.

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  Months pass'd on, and no Sir Eustace!
  Nor of him were tidings heard.
  Wherefore, bold as day, the Murderer
  Back again to England steer'd.                       
  To his Castle Hubert sped;
  He has nothing now to dread.
  But silent and by stealth he came,
  And at an hour which nobody could name.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  None could tell if it were night-time,
  Night or day, at even or morn;
  For the sound was heard by no one
  Of the proclamation-horn.
  But bold Hubert lives in glee:
  Months and years went smilingly;                     
  With plenty was his table spread;
  And bright the Lady is who shares his bed.

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  Likewise he had Sons and Daughters;
  And, as good men do, he sate
  At his board by these surrounded,
  Flourishing in fair estate.
  And, while thus in open day
  Once he sate, as old books say,
  A blast was utter'd from the Horn,
  Where by the Castle-gate it hung forlorn.            

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  'Tis the breath of good Sir Eustace!
  He is come to claim his right:
  Ancient Castle, Woods, and Mountains
  Hear the challenge with delight.
  Hubert! though the blast be blown
  He is helpless and alone:
  Thou hast a dungeon, speak the word!
  And there he may be lodg'd, and thou be Lord.

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  Speak! astounded Hubert cannot;
  And if power to speak he had,                        
  All are daunted, all the household
  Smitten to the heart, and sad.
  'Tis Sir Eustace; if it be
  Living Man, it must be he!
  Thus Hubert thought in his dismay,
  And by a Postern-gate he slunk away.

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  Long, and long was he unheard of:
  To his Brother then he came,
  Made confession, ask'd forgiveness,
  Ask'd it by a Brother's name,                     
  And by all the saints in heaven;
  And of Eustace was forgiv'n:
  Then in a Convent went to hide
  His melancholy head, and there he died.

RHYME a b c b d d e e

  But Sir Eustace, whom good Angels
  Had preserv'd from Murderers' hands,
  And from Pagan chains had rescued,
  Liv'd with honour on his lands.
  Sons he had, saw Sons of theirs:
  And through ages, Heirs of Heirs,                
  A long posterity renown'd,
  Sounded the Horn which they alone could sound.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  Where art thou, my beloved Son,
  Where art thou, worse to me than dead?
  Oh find me prosperous or undone!
  Or, if the grave be now thy bed,
  Why am I ignorant of the same
  That I may rest; and neither blame,
  Nor sorrow may attend thy name?

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  Seven years, alas, to have received
  No tidings of an only child;
  To have despair'd, and have believ'd,                
  And be for evermore beguil'd;
  Sometimes with thoughts of very bliss!
  I catch at them, and then I miss;
  Was ever darkness like to this?

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  He was among the prime in worth,
  An object beauteous to behold;
  Well born, well bred; I sent him forth
  Ingenuous, innocent, and bold:
  If things ensued that wanted grace,
  As hath been said, they were not base;               
  And never blush was on my face.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  Ah! little doth the Young One dream,
  When full of play and childish cares,
  What power hath even his wildest scream,
  Heard by his Mother unawares!
  He knows it not, he cannot guess:
  Years to a Mother bring distress;
  But do not make her love the less.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  Neglect me! no I suffer'd long
  From that ill thought; and being blind,              
  Said, "Pride shall help me in my wrong;
  Kind mother have I been, as kind
  As ever breathed:" and that is true;
  I've wet my path with tears like dew,
  Weeping for him when no one knew.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  My Son, if thou be humbled, poor,
  Hopeless of honour and of gain,
  Oh! do not dread thy mother's door;
  Think not of me with grief and pain:
  I now can see with better eyes;                      
  And worldly grandeur I despise,
  And fortune with her gifts and lies

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  Alas! the fowls of Heaven have wings,
  And blasts of Heaven will aid their flight;
  They mount, how short a voyage brings
  The Wanderers back to their delight!
  Chains tie us down by land and sea;
  And wishes, vain as mine, may be
  All that is left to comfort thee.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  Perhaps some dungeon hears thee groan,               
  Maim'd, mangled by inhuman men;
  Or thou upon a Desart thrown
  Inheritest the Lion's Den;
  Or hast been summoned to the Deep,
  Thou, Thou and all thy mates, to keep
  An incommunicable sleep.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  I look for Ghosts; but none will force
  Their way to me; 'tis falsely said
  That there was ever intercourse
  Betwixt the living and the dead;                      
  For, surely, then I should have sight
  Of Him I wait for day and night,
  With love and longings infinite.

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  My apprehensions come in crowds;
  I dread the rustling of the grass;
  The very shadows of the clouds
  Have power to shake me as they pass:
  I question things, and do not find
  One that will answer to my mind;
  And all the world appears unkind.                    

RHYME a b a b c c c 

  Beyond participation lie
  My troubles, and beyond relief:
  If any chance to heave a sigh
  They pity me, and not my grief.
  Then come to me, my Son, or send
  Some tidings that my woes may end;
  I have no other earthly friend.

TITLE

RHYME a a *

  That way look, my Infant, lo!
  What a pretty baby show!
  See the Kitten on the Wall,
  Sporting with the leaves that fall,
  Wither'd leaves, one, two, and three,
  From the lofty Elder-tree!
  Through the calm and frosty air
  Of this morning bright and fair,
  Eddying round and round they sink
  Softly, slowly: one might think,                       
  From the motions that are made,
  Every little leaf convey'd
  Sylph or Faery hither tending,
  To this lower world descending,
  Each invisible and mute,
  In his wavering parachute.
  --But the Kitten, how she starts,
  Crouches, stretches, paws, and darts;
  First at one and then it's fellow
  Just as light and just as yellow;                      
  There are many now--now one--
  Now they stop; and there are none--
  What intenseness of desire
  In her upward eye of fire!
  With a tiger-leap half way
  Now she meets the coming prey,
  Lets it go as fast, and then
  Has it in her power again:
  Now she works with three or four,
  Like an Indian Conjuror;                               
  Quick as he in feats of art,
  Far beyond in joy of heart.
  Were her antics play'd in the eye
  Of a thousand Standers-by,
  Clapping hands with shout and stare,
  What would little Tabby care
  For the plaudits of the Crowd?
  Over happy to be proud,
  Over wealthy in the treasure
  Of her own exceeding pleasure!                         

RHYME a a *

  'Tis a pretty Baby-treat;
  Nor, I deem, for me unmeet:
  Here, for neither Babe or me,
  Other Play-mate can I see.
  Of the countless living things,
  That with stir of feet and wings,
  (In the sun or under shade
  Upon bough or grassy blade)
  And with busy revellings,
  Chirp and song, and murmurings,                        
  Made this Orchard's narrow space,
  And this Vale so blithe a place;
  Multitudes are swept away
  Never more to breathe the day:
  Some are sleeping; some in Bands
  Travell'd into distant Lands;
  Others slunk to moor and wood,
  Far from human neighbourhood,
  And, among the Kinds that keep
  With us closer fellowship,                             
  With us openly abide,
  All have laid their mirth aside,
  --Where is he that giddy Sprite,
  Blue-cap, with his colours bright,
  Who was blest as bird could be,
  Feeding in the apple-tree,
  Made such wanton spoil and rout,
  Turning blossoms inside out,

RHYME a a a 

  Hung with head towards the ground,
  Flutter'd, perch'd; into a round                       
  Bound himself, and then unbound;

RHYME a b c b d d e e 

  Lithest, gaudiest Harlequin,
  Prettiest Tumbler ever seen,
  Light of heart, and light of limb,
  What is now become of Him?
  Lambs, that through the mountains went
  Frisking, bleating merriment,
  When the year was in it's prime,
  They are sober'd by this time.

RHYME a a a 

  If you look to vale or hill,                           
  If you listen, all is still,
  Save a little neighbouring Rill;

RHYME a a *

  That from out the rocky ground
  Strikes a solitary sound.
  Vainly glitters hill and plain,
  And the air is calm in vain;
  Vainly Morning spreads the lure
  Of a sky serene and pure;
  Creature none can she decoy
  Into open sign of joy:                                 
  Is it that they have a fear
  Of the dreary season near?
  Or that other pleasures be
  Sweeter even than gaiety?

RHYME a a *

  Yet, whate'er enjoyments dwell
  In the impenetrable cell
  Of the silent heart which Nature
  Furnishes to every Creature,
  Whatsoe'er we feel and know
  Too sedate for outward show,                        
  Such a light of gladness breaks,
  Pretty Kitten! from thy freaks,
  Spreads with such a living grace
  O'er my little Laura's face;
  Yes, the sight so stirs and charms
  Thee, Baby, laughing in my arms,
  That almost I could repine
  That your transports are not mine,
  That I do not wholly fare
  Even as ye do, thoughtless Pair!                   
  And I will have my careless season
  Spite of melancholy reason,
  Will walk through life in such a way
  That, when time brings on decay,
  Now and then I may possess
  Hours of perfect gladsomeness.
  --Pleas'd by any random toy;
  By a Kitten's busy joy,
  Or an infant's laughing eye
  Sharing in the extacy;                              
  I would fare like that or this,
  Find my wisdom in my bliss;
  Keep the sprightly soul awake,
  And have faculties to take
  Even from things by sorrow wrought
  Matter for a jocund thought;
  Spite of care, and spite of grief,
  To gambol with Life's falling Leaf.

TITLE

RHYME a b c b d e d d e f f 

  Seven Daughters had Lord Archibald,
  All Children of one Mother:
  I could not say in one short day
  What love they bore each other,
  A Garland of seven Lilies wrought!
  Seven Sisters that together dwell;
  But he, bold Knight as ever fought,
  Their Father, took of them no thought,
  He loved the Wars so well.
  Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,                      
  The Solitude of Binnorie!

RHYME a b c b d e d d e f f 

  Fresh blows the wind, a western wind,
  And from the shores of Erin,
  Across the wave, a Rover brave
  To Binnorie is steering:
  Right onward to the Scottish strand
  The gallant ship is borne;
  The Warriors leap upon the land,
  And hark! the Leader of the Band
  Hath blown his bugle horn.                             
  Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
  The Solitude of Binnorie.

RHYME a b c b d e d d e f f 

  Beside a Grotto of their own,
  With boughs above them closing,
  The Seven are laid, and in the shade
  They lie like Fawns reposing.
  But now, upstarting with affright
  At noise of Man and Steed,
  Away they fly to left to right--
  Of your fair household, Father Knight,                 
  Methinks you take small heed!
  Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
  The Solitude of Binnorie.

RHYME a b c b d e d d e f f 

  Away the seven fair Campbells fly,
  And, over Hill and Hollow,
  With menace proud, and insult loud,
  The youthful Rovers follow.
  Cried they, "Your Father loves to roam:
  Enough for him to find
  The empty House when he comes home;                    
  For us your yellow ringlets comb,
  For us be fair and kind!"
  Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
  The Solitude of Binnorie.

RHYME a b c b d e d d e f f 

  Some close behind, some side by side,
  Like clouds in stormy weather,
  They run, and cry, "Nay let us die,
  And let us die together."
  A Lake was near; the shore was steep;
  There never Foot had been;                             
  They ran, and with a desperate leap
  Together plung'd into the deep,
  Nor ever more were seen.
  Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully,
  The Solitude of Binnorie.

RHYME a b c b d e d d e f f 

  The Stream that flows out of the Lake,
  As through the glen it rambles,
  Repeats a moan o'er moss and stone,
  For those seven lovely Campbells.
  Seven little Islands, green and bare,                  
  Have risen from out the deep:
  The Fishers say, those Sisters fair
  By Faeries are all buried there,
  And there together sleep.
  Sing, mournfully, oh! mournfully
  The Solitude of Binnorie.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c d d e e f f g g 

  O Thou! whose fancies from afar are brought;
  Who of thy words dost make a mock apparel,
  And fittest to unutterable thought
  The breeze-like motion and the self-born carol;
  Thou Faery Voyager! that dost float
  In such clear water, that thy Boat
  May rather seem
  To brood on air than on an earthly stream;
  Suspended in a stream as clear as sky,
  Where earth and heaven do make one imagery;            
  O blessed Vision! happy Child!
  That art so exquisitely wild,
  I think of thee with, many fears
  For what may be thy lot in future years.

RHYME a b a b 

  I thought of times when Pain might be thy guest,
  Lord of thy house and hospitality;
  And grief, uneasy Lover! never rest
  But when she sate within the touch of thee.

RHYME a a b b b c d d e c e f f g g 

  Oh! too industrious folly!			
  Oh! vain and causeless melancholy!                   
  Nature will either end thee quite;		
  Or, lengthening out thy season of delight,	
  Preserve for thee, by individual right,	
  A young Lamb's heart among the full-grown flocks.
  What hast Thou to do with sorrow,		
  Or the injuries of tomorrow?			
  Thou art a Dew-drop, which, the morn brings forth,
  Not doom'd to jostle with unkindly shocks;	
  Or to be trail'd along the soiling earth;	
  A Gem that glitters while it lives,                  
  And no forewarning gives;			
  But, at the touch of wrong, without a strife	
  Slips in a moment out of life.		

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

  Among all lovely things my Love had been;
  Had noted well the stars, all flowers that grew
  About her home; but she had never seen
  A Glow-worm, never one, and this I knew.

RHYME a b a b 

  While riding near her home one stormy night
  A single Glow-worm did I chance to espy;
  I gave a fervent welcome to the sight,
  And from my Horse I leapt; great joy had I.

RHYME a b a b 

  Upon a leaf the Glow-worm did I lay,
  To bear it with me through the stormy night:           
  And, as before, it shone without dismay;
  Albeit putting forth a fainter light.

RHYME a b a b 

  When to the Dwelling of my Love I came,
  I went into the Orchard quietly;
  And left the Glow-worm, blessing it by name,
  Laid safely by itself, beneath a Tree.

RHYME a b a b 

  The whole next day, I hoped, and hoped with fear;
  At night the Glow-worm shone beneath the Tree:
  I led my Lucy to the spot, "Look here!"
  Oh! joy it was for her, and joy for me!                

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

  I travell'd among unknown Men,
    In Lands beyond the Sea;
  Nor England! did I know till then
    What love I bore to thee.

RHYME a b a b 

  'Tis past, that melancholy dream!
    Nor will I quit thy shore
  A second time; for still I seem
    To love thee more and more.

RHYME a b a b 

  Among thy mountains did I feel
    The joy of my desire;                              
  And She I cherish'd turn'd her wheel
    Beside an English fire.

RHYME a b a b 

  Thy mornings shew'd--thy nights conceal'd
    The bowers where Lucy play'd;
  And thine is, too, the last green field
    Which Lucy's eyes survey'd!

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  Stern Daughter of the Voice of God!
  O Duty! if that name thou love
  Who art a Light to guide, a Rod
  To check the erring, and reprove;
  Thou who art victory and law
  When empty terrors overawe;
  From vain temptations dost set free;
  From strife and from despair; a glorious ministry.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  There are who ask not if thine eye
  Be on them; who, in love and truth,                    
  Where no misgiving is, rely
  Upon the genial sense of youth:
  Glad Hearts! without reproach or blot;
  Who do thy work, and know it not:
  May joy be theirs while life shall last!
  And Thou, if they should totter, teach them to stand fast!

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  Serene will be our days and bright,
  And happy will our nature be,
  When love is an unerring light,
  And joy its own security.                              
  And bless'd are they who in the main
  This faith, even now, do entertain:
  Live in the spirit of this creed;
  Yet find that other strength, according to their need.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  I, loving freedom, and untried;
  No sport of every random gust,
  Yet being to myself a guide,
  Too blindly have reposed my trust:
  Resolved that nothing e'er should press
  Upon my present happiness,                             
  I shoved unwelcome tasks away;
  But thee I now would serve more strictly, if I may.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  Through no disturbance of my soul,
  Or strong compunction in me wrought,
  I supplicate for thy controul;
  But in the quietness of thought:
  Me this uncharter'd freedom tires;
  I feel the weight of chance desires:
  My hopes no more must change their name,
  I long for a repose which ever is the same.            

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  Yet not the less would I throughout
  Still act according to the voice
  Of my own wish; and feel past doubt
  That my submissiveness was choice:
  Not seeking in the school of pride
  For "precepts over dignified,"
  Denial and restraint I prize
  No farther than they breed a second Will more wise.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  Stern Lawgiver! yet thou dost wear
  The Godhead's most benignant grace;                    
  Nor know we any thing so fair
  As is the smile upon thy face;
  Flowers laugh before thee on their beds;
  And Fragrance in thy footing treads;
  Thou dost preserve the Stars from wrong;
  And the most ancient Heavens through Thee are fresh and strong.

RHYME a b a b c c d d 

  To humbler functions, awful Power!
  I call thee: I myself commend
  Unto thy guidance from this hour;
  Oh! let my weakness have an end!                       
  Give unto me, made lowly wise,
  The spirit of self-sacrifice;
  The confidence of reason give;
  And in the light of truth thy Bondman let me live!

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c c 

    She had a tall Man's height, or more;
    No bonnet screen'd her from the heat;
    A long drab-colour'd Cloak she wore,
    A Mantle reaching to her feet:
    What other dress she had I could not know;
  Only she wore a Cap that was as white as snow.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    In all my walks, through field or town,
    Such Figure had I never seen:
    Her face was of Egyptian brown:
    Fit person was she for a Queen,                    
    To head those ancient Amazonian files:
  Or ruling Bandit's Wife, among the Grecian Isles.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    Before me begging did she stand,
    Pouring out sorrows like a sea;
    Grief after grief:--on English Land
    Such woes I knew could never be;
    And yet a boon I gave her; for the Creature
  Was beautiful to see; a Weed of glorious feature!

RHYME a b a b c c 

    I left her, and pursued my way;
    And soon before me did espy                        
    A pair of little Boys at play,
    Chasing a crimson butterfly;
    The Taller follow'd with his hat in hand,
  Wreath'd round with yellow flow'rs, the gayest of the land.

RHYME a b a b c c 

    The Other wore a rimless crown,
    With leaves of laurel stuck about:
    And they both follow'd up and down,
    Each whooping with a merry shout;
    Two Brothers seem'd they, eight and ten years old;
  And like that Woman's face as gold is like to gold.  

RHYME a b a b c c 

    They bolted on me thus, and lo!
    Each ready with a plaintive whine;
    Said I, "Not half an hour ago
    Your Mother has had alms of mine."
    "That cannot be," one answer'd, "She is dead."
  "Nay but I gave her pence, and she will buy you bread."

RHYME a b a b c c 

    "She has been dead, Sir, many a day."
    "Sweet Boys, you're telling me a lie";
    "It was your Mother, as I say--"
    And in the twinkling of an eye,                    
    "Come, come!" cried one; and, without more ado,
  Off to some other play they both together flew.

TITLE

RHYME a b a c c d d 

  Up with me! up with me into the clouds!
    For thy song, Lark, is strong;
  Up with me, up with me into the clouds!
    Singing, singing,
  With all the heav'ns about thee ringing,
    Lift me, guide me, till I find
  That spot which seems so to thy mind!

RHYME a a a b c c b b

I have walked through wildernesses dreary
          And to-day my heart is weary;
          Had I now the wings of a Faery,                             
          Up to thee would I fly.
          There is madness about thee, and joy divine
          In that song of thine;
          Lift me, guide me high and high
          To thy banqueting-place in the sky.

RHYME a a b c c d e e e c

                  Joyous as morning
          Thou art laughing and scorning;
          Thou hast a nest for thy love and thy rest,
          And, though little troubled with sloth,
          Drunken Lark! thou would'st be loth                         
          To be such a traveller as I.
          Happy, happy Liver,
          With a soul as strong as a mountain river
          Pouring out praise to the Almighty Giver,
              Joy and jollity be with us both!

RHYME a b b a c c

          Alas! my journey, rugged and uneven,
          Through prickly moors or dusty ways must wind;
          But hearing thee, or others of thy kind,
          As full of gladness and as free of heaven,
          I, with my fate contented, will plod on,                    
          And hope for higher raptures, when life's day is done.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b a b b a c d c d c d c 

  "With how sad steps, O Moon thou climb'st the sky.
  How silently, and with how wan a face!"
  Where art thou? Thou whom I have seen on high
  Running among the clouds a Wood-nymph's race?
  Unhappy Nuns, whose common breath's a sigh
  Which they would stifle, move at such a pace!
  The Northern Wind, to call thee to the chace,
  Must blow tonight his bugle horn. Had I
  The power of Merlin, Goddess! this should be
  And all the Stars, now shrouded up in heaven,
  Should sally forth to keep thee company.
  What strife would then be yours, fair Creatures, driv'n
  Now up, now down, and sparkling in your glee!
  But, Cynthia, should to Thee the palm be giv'n,
  Queen both for beauty and for majesty.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

  The Post-boy drove with fierce career,
  For threat'ning clouds the moon had drown'd;
  When suddenly I seem'd to hear
  A moan, a lamentable sound.

RHYME a b a b 

  As if the wind blew many ways
  I heard the sound, and more and more:
  It seem'd to follow with the Chaise,
  And still I heard it as before.

RHYME a b a b 

  At length I to the Boy call'd out,
  He stopp'd his horses at the word;                     
  But neither cry, nor voice, nor shout,
  Nor aught else like it could be heard.

RHYME a b a b 

  The Boy then smack'd his whip, and fast
  The horses scamper'd through the rain;
  And soon I heard upon the blast
  The voice, and bade him halt again.

RHYME a b a b 

  Said I, alighting on the ground,
  "What can it be, this piteous moan?"
  And there a little Girl I found,
  Sitting behind the Chaise, alone.                      

RHYME a b a b 

  "My Cloak!" the word was last and first,
  And loud and bitterly she wept,
  As if her very heart would burst;
  And down from off the Chaise she leapt.

RHYME a b a b 

  "What ails you, Child?" she sobb'd, "Look here!"
  I saw it in the wheel entangled,
  A weather beaten Rag as e'er
  From any garden scare-crow dangled.

RHYME a b a b 

  'Twas twisted betwixt nave and spoke;
  Her help she lent, and with good heed                  
  Together we released the Cloak;
  A wretched, wretched rag indeed!

RHYME a b a b 

  "And whither are you going, Child,
  To night along these lonesome ways?"
  "To Durham" answer'd she half wild--
  "Then come with me into the chaise."

RHYME a b a b 

  She sate like one past all relief;
  Sob after sob she forth did send
  In wretchedness, as if her grief
  Could never, never, have an end.                       

RHYME a b a b 

  "My Child, in Durham do you dwell?"
  She check'd herself in her distress,
  And said, "My name is Alice Fell;
  I'm fatherless and motherless."

RHYME a b a b 

  "And I to Durham, Sir, belong."
  And then, as if the thought would choke
  Her very heart, her grief grew strong;
  And all was for her tatter'd Cloak.

RHYME a b a b 

  The chaise drove on; our journey's end
  Was nigh; and, sitting by my side,                     
  As if she'd lost her only friend
  She wept, nor would be pacified.

RHYME a b a b 

  Up to the Tavern-door we post;
  Of Alice and her grief I told;
  And I gave money to the Host,
  To buy a new Cloak for the old.

RHYME a b a b 

  "And let it be of duffil grey,
  As warm a cloak as man can sell!"
  Proud Creature was she the next day,
  The little Orphan, Alice Fell!                         

TITLE

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  There was a roaring in the wind all night;
  The rain came heavily and fell in floods;
  But now the sun is rising calm and bright;
  The birds are singing in the distant woods;
  Over his own sweet voice the Stock-dove broods;
  The Jay makes answer as the Magpie chatters;
  And all the air is fill'd with pleasant noise of waters.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  All things that love the sun are out of doors;
  The sky rejoices in the morning's birth;
  The grass is bright with rain-drops; on the moors      
  The Hare is running races in her mirth;
  And with her feet she from the plashy earth
  Raises a mist; which, glittering in the sun,
  Runs with her all the way, wherever she doth run.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  I was a Traveller then upon the moor;
  I saw the Hare that rac'd about with joy;
  I heard the woods, and distant waters, roar;
  Or heard them not, as happy as a Boy:
  The pleasant season did my heart employ:
  My old remembrances went from me wholly;               
  And all the ways of men, so vain and melancholy.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  But, as it sometimes chanceth, from the might
  Of joy in minds that can no farther go,
  As high as we have mounted in delight
  In our dejection do we sink as low,
  To me that morning did it happen so;
  And fears, and fancies, thick upon me came;
  Dim sadness, & blind thoughts I knew not nor could name.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  I heard the Sky-lark singing in the sky;
  And I bethought me of the playful Hare:                
  Even such a happy Child of earth am I;
  Even as these blissful Creatures do I fare;
  Far from the world I walk, and from all care;
  But there may come another day to me,
  Solitude, pain of heart, distress, and poverty.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  My whole life I have liv'd in pleasant thought,
  As if life's business were a summer mood;
  As if all needful things would come unsought
  To genial faith, still rich in genial good;
  But how can He expect that others should               
  Build for him, sow for him, and at his call
  Love him, who for himself will take no heed at all?

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous Boy,
  The sleepless Soul that perish'd in its pride;
  Of Him who walk'd in glory and in joy
  Behind his plough, upon the mountain-side:
  By our own spirits are we deified;
  We Poets in our youth begin in gladness;
  But thereof comes in the end despondency and madness.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  Now, whether it were by peculiar grace,                
  A leading from above, a something given,
  Yet it befel, that, in this lonely place,
  When up and down my fancy thus was driven,
  And I with these untoward thoughts had striven,
  I saw a Man before me unawares:
  The oldest Man he seem'd that ever wore grey hairs.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  My course I stopped as soon as I espied
  The Old Man in that naked wilderness:
  Close by a Pond, upon the further side,
  He stood alone: a minute's space I guess             
  I watch'd him, he continuing motionless:
  To the Pool's further margin then I drew;
  He being all the while before me full in view.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  As a huge Stone is sometimes seen to lie
  Couch'd on the bald top of an eminence;
  Wonder to all who do the same espy
  By what means it could thither come, and whence;
  So that it seems a thing endued with sense:
  Like a Sea-beast crawl'd forth, which on a shelf
  Of rock or sand reposeth, there to sun itself.         

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  Such seem'd this Man, not all alive nor dead,
  Nor all asleep; in his extreme old age:
  His body was bent double, feet and head
  Coming together in their pilgrimage;
  As if some dire constraint of pain, or rage
  Of sickness felt by him in times long past,
  A more than human weight upon his frame had cast.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  Himself he propp'd, his body, limbs, and face,
  Upon a long grey Staff of shaven wood:
  And, still as I drew near with gentle pace,            
  Beside the little pond or moorish flood
  Motionless as a Cloud the Old Man stood;
  That heareth not the loud winds when they call;
  And moveth altogether, if it move at all.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  At length, himself unsettling, he the Pond
  Stirred with his Staff, and fixedly did look
  Upon the muddy water, which he conn'd,
  As if he had been reading in a book:
  And now such freedom as I could I took;
  And, drawing to his side, to him did say,              
  "This morning gives us promise of a glorious day."

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  A gentle answer did the Old Man make,
  In courteous speech which forth he slowly drew:
  And him with further words I thus bespake,
  "What kind of work is that which you pursue?
  This is a lonesome place for one like you."
  He answer'd me with pleasure and surprize;
  And there was, while he spake, a fire about his eyes.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  His words came feebly, from a feeble chest,
  Yet each in solemn order follow'd each,             
  With something of a lofty utterance drest;
  Choice word, and measured phrase; above the reach
  Of ordinary men; a stately speech!
  Such as grave Livers do in Scotland use,
  Religious men, who give to God and Man their dues.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  He told me that he to this pond had come
  To gather Leeches, being old and poor:
  Employment hazardous and wearisome!
  And he had many hardships to endure:
  From Pond to Pond he roam'd, from moor to moor,    
  Housing, with God's good help, by choice or chance:
  And in this way he gain'd an honest maintenance.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  The Old Man still stood talking by my side;
  But now his voice to me was like a stream
  Scarce heard; nor word from word could I divide;
  And the whole Body of the man did seem
  Like one whom I had met with in a dream;
  Or like a Man from some far region sent;
  To give me human strength, and strong admonishment.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  My former thoughts return'd: the fear that kills;   
  The hope that is unwilling to be fed;
  Cold, pain, and labour, and all fleshly ills;
  And mighty Poets in their misery dead.
  And now, not knowing what the Old Man had said,
  My question eagerly did I renew,
  "How is it that you live, and what is it you do?"

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  He with a smile did then his words repeat;
  And said, that, gathering Leeches, far and wide
  He travelled; stirring thus about his feet
  The waters of the Ponds where they abide.         
  "Once I could meet with them on every side;
  But they have dwindled long by slow decay;
  Yet still I persevere, and find them where I may."

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  While he was talking thus, the lonely place,
  The Old Man's shape, and speech, all troubled me:
  In my mind's eye I seem'd to see him pace
  About the weary moors continually,
  Wandering about alone and silently.
  While I these thoughts within myself pursued,
  He, having made a pause, the same discourse renewed.

RHYME a b a b b c c 

  And soon with this he other matter blended,
  Chearfully uttered, with demeanour kind,
  But stately in the main; and, when he ended,
  I could have laugh'd myself to scorn, to find
  In that decrepit Man so firm a mind.
  "God," said I, "be my help and stay secure;
  I'll think of the Leech-gatherer on the lonely moor."

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e e d d e 

  Nuns fret not at their Convent's narrow room;
  And Hermits are contented with their Cells;
  And Students with their pensive Citadels:
  Maids at the Wheel, the Weaver at his Loom,
  Sit blithe and happy; Bees that soar for bloom,
  High as the highest Peak of Furness Fells,
  Will murmur by the hour in Foxglove bells:
  In truth, the prison, unto which we doom
  Ourselves, no prison is: and hence to me,
  In sundry moods, 'twas pastime to be bound
  Within the Sonnet's scanty plot of ground:
  Pleas'd if some Souls (for such there needs must be)
  Who have felt the weight of too much liberty,
  Should find short solace there, as I have found.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e d e 

  How sweet it is, when mother Fancy rocks		
  The wayward brain, to saunter through a wood!		
  An old place, full of many a lovely brood,		
  Tall trees, green arbours, and ground flowers in flocks;
  And Wild rose tip-toe upon hawthorn stocks,		
  Like to a bonny Lass, who plays her pranks		
  At Wakes and Fairs with wandering Mountebanks,	
  When she stands cresting the Clown's head, and mocks	
  The crowd beneath her. Verily I think,		
  Such place to me is sometimes like a dream		
  Or map of the whole world: thoughts, link by link	
  Enter through ears and eyesight, with such gleam	
  Of all things, that at last in fear I shrink,		
  And leap at once from the delicious stream.		

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e e d e d 

  Where lies the Land to which yon Ship must go?
  Festively she puts forth in trim array;
  As vigorous as a Lark at break of day:
  Is she for tropic suns, or polar snow?
  What boots the enquiry? Neither friend nor foe
  She cares for; let her travel where she may,
  She finds familiar names, a beaten way
  Ever before her, and a wind to blow.
  Yet still I ask, what Haven is her mark?
  And, almost as it was when ships were rare,
  From time to time, like Pilgrims, here and there
  Crossing the waters; doubt, and something dark,
  Of the old Sea some reverential fear,
  Is with me at thy farewell, joyous Bark!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d e c e d 

  Ere we had reach'd the wish'd-for place, night fell:
  We were too late at least by one dark hour,
  And nothing could we see of all that power
  Of prospect, whereof many thousands tell.
  The western sky did recompence us well
  With Grecian Temple, Minaret, and Bower;
  And, in one part, a Minster with its Tower
  Substantially distinct, a place for Bell
  Or Clock to toll from. Many a glorious pile
  Did we behold, sights that might well repay
  All disappointment! and, as such, the eye
  Delighted in them; but we felt, the while,
  We should forget them: they are of the sky,
  And from our earthly memory fade away.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d 

  These words were utter'd in a pensive mood,
  Even while mine eyes were on that solemn sight:
  A contrast and reproach to gross delight,
  And life's unspiritual pleasures daily woo'd!
  But now upon this thought I cannot brood:
  It is unstable, and deserts me quite;
  Nor will I praise a Cloud, however bright,
  Disparaging Man's gifts, and proper food.
  The Grove, the sky-built Temple, and the Dome,
  Though clad in colours beautiful and pure,
  Find in the heart of man no natural home:
  The immortal Mind craves objects that endure:
  These cleave to it; from these it cannot roam,
  Nor they from it: their fellowship is secure.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b c d e d e d e 

  O gentle Sleep! do they belong to thee,
  These twinklings of oblivion? Thou dost love
  To sit in meekness, like the brooding Dove,
  A Captive never wishing to be free.
  This tiresome night, O Sleep! thou art to me
  A Fly, that up and down himself doth shove
  Upon a fretful rivulet, now above,
  Now on the water vex'd with mockery.
  I have no pain that calls for patience, no;
  Hence am I cross and peevish as a child:
  Am pleas'd by fits to have thee for my foe,
  Yet ever willing to be reconciled:
  O gentle Creature! do not use me so,
  But once and deeply let me be beguiled.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d 

  A flock of sheep that leisurely pass by,
  One after one; the sound of rain, and bees
  Murmuring; the fall of rivers, winds and seas,
  Smooth fields, white sheets of water, and pure sky;
  I've thought of all by turns; and still I lie
  Sleepless; and soon the small birds' melodies
  Must hear, first utter'd from my orchard trees;
  And the first Cuckoo's melancholy cry.
  Even thus last night, and two nights more, I lay,
  And could not win thee, Sleep! by any stealth:
  So do not let me wear to night away:
  Without Thee what is all the morning's wealth?
  Come, blessed barrier betwixt day and day,
  Dear mother of fresh thoughts and joyous health!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d e c d e 

  Fond words have oft been spoken to thee, Sleep!
  And thou hast had thy store of tenderest names;
  The very sweetest words that fancy frames
  When thankfulness of heart is strong and deep!
  Dear bosom Child we call thee, that dost steep
  In rich reward all suffering; Balm that tames
  All anguish; Saint that evil thoughts and aims
  Takest away, and into souls dost creep,
  Like to a breeze from heaven. Shall I alone;
  I surely not a man ungently made,
  Call thee worst Tyrant by which Flesh is crost?
  Perverse, self-will'd to own and to disown,
  Mere Slave of them who never for thee pray'd,
  Still last to come where thou art wanted most!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d 

  With Ships the sea was sprinkled far and nigh,
  Like stars in heaven, and joyously it showed;
  Some lying fast at anchor in the road,
  Some veering up and down, one knew not why.
  A goodly Vessel did I then espy
  Come like a Giant from a haven broad;
  And lustily along the Bay she strode,
  Her tackling rich, and of apparel high.
  This Ship was nought to me, nor I to her,
  Yet I pursued her with a Lover's look;
  This Ship to all the rest did I prefer:
  When will she turn, and whither? She will brook
  No tarrying; where she comes the winds must stir:
  On went She, and due north her journey took.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d e c d e 

  O mountain Stream! the Shepherd and his Cot
  Are privileg'd Inmates of deep solitude:
  Nor would the nicest Anchorite exclude
  A Field or two of brighter green, or Plot
  Of tillage-ground, that seemeth like a spot
  Of stationary sunshine: thou hast view'd
  These only, Duddon! with their paths renew'd
  By fits and starts, yet this contents thee not.
  Thee hath some awful Spirit impell'd to leave,
  Utterly to desert, the haunts of men,
  Though simple thy Companions were and few;
  And through this wilderness a passage cleave
  Attended but by thy own Voice, save when
  The Clouds and Fowls of the air thy way pursue.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b c d b e e f g g g f 

  Yes! hope may with my strong desire keep pace,
  And I be undeluded, unbetray'd;
  For if of our affections none find grace
  In sight of Heaven, then, wherefore hath God made
  The world which we inhabit? Better plea
  Love cannot have, than that in loving thee
  Glory to that eternal Peace is paid,
  Who such Divinity to thee imparts
  As hallows and makes pure all gentle hearts.
  His hope is treacherous only whose love dies
  With beauty, which is varying every hour;
  But, in chaste hearts uninfluenced by the power
  Of outward change, there blooms a deathless flower,
  That breathes on earth the air of paradise.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e e f d f 

  No mortal object did these eyes behold		
  When first they met the placid light of thine,	
  And my Soul felt her destiny divine,			
  And hope of endless peace in me grew bold:		
  Heav'n-born, the Soul a heav'n-ward course must hold;	
  Beyond the visible world She soars to seek,		
  For what delights the sense is false and weak,	
  Ideal Form, the universal mould.			
  The wise man, I affirm, can find no rest		
  In that which perishes: nor will he lend		
  His heart to aught which doth on time depend.		
  'Tis sense, unbridled will, and not true love,	
  Which kills the soul: Love betters what is best,	
  Even here below, but more in heaven above.		

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c e e 

  The prayers I make will then be sweet indeed
  If Thou the spirit give by which I pray:
  My unassisted heart is barren clay,
  Which of its native self can nothing feed:
  Of good and pious works thou art the seed,
  Which quickens only where thou say'st it may:
  Unless thou shew to us thine own true way
  No man can find it: Father! thou must lead.
  Do Thou, then, breathe those thoughts into my mind
  By which such virtue may in me be bred
  That in thy holy footsteps I may tread;
  The fetters of my tongue do Thou unbind,
  That I may have the power to sing of thee,
  And sound thy praises everlastingly.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a c c d d a d 

  Calm is all nature as a resting wheel.	
  The Kine are couch'd upon the dewy grass;	
  The Horse alone, seen dimly as I pass,	
  Is up, and cropping yet his later meal:	
  Dark is the ground; a slumber seems to steal	
  O'er vale, and mountain, and the starless sky.
  Now, in this blank of things, a harmony	
  Home-felt, and home-created seems to heal	
  That grief for which the senses still supply	
  Fresh food; for only then, when memory	
  Is hush'd, am I at rest. My Friends, restrain	
  Those busy cares that would allay my pain:	
  Oh! leave me to myself; nor let me feel	
  The officious touch that makes me droop again.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d 

  Earth has not any thing to shew more fair:
  Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
  A sight so touching in it's majesty:
  This City now doth like a garment wear
  The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,
  Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
  Open unto the fields, and to the sky;
  All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
  Never did sun more beautifully steep
  In his first splendor valley, rock, or hill;
  Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
  The river glideth at his own sweet will:
  Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
  And all that mighty heart is lying still!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c d c 

  "Beloved Vale!" I said, "when I shall con
  Those many records of my childish years,
  Remembrance of myself and of my peers
  Will press me down: to think of what is gone
  Will be an awful thought, if life have one."
  But, when into the Vale I came, no fears
  Distress'd me; I look'd round, I shed no tears;
  Deep thought, or awful vision, I had none.
  By thousand petty fancies I was cross'd,
  To see the Trees, which I had thought so tall,
  Mere dwarfs; the Brooks so narrow, Fields so small.
  A Juggler's Balls old Time about him toss'd;
  I looked, I stared, I smiled, I laughed; and all
  The weight of sadness was in wonder lost.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c c d c 

  Methought I saw the footsteps of a throne
  Which mists and vapours from mine eyes did shroud,
  Nor view of him who sate thereon allow'd;
  But all the steps and ground about were strown
  With sights the ruefullest that flesh and bone
  Ever put on; a miserable crowd,
  Sick, hale, old, young, who cried before that cloud,
  "Thou art our king, O Death! to thee we groan."
  I seem'd to mount those steps; the vapours gave
  Smooth way; and I beheld the face of one
  Sleeping alone within a mossy cave,
  With her face up to heaven; that seem'd to have
  Pleasing remembrance of a thought foregone;
  A lovely Beauty in a summer grave!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d e c d e 

  Lady! the songs of Spring were in the grove
  While I was framing beds for winter flowers;
  While I was planting green unfading bowers,
  And shrubs to hang upon the warm alcove,
  And sheltering wall; and still, as fancy wove
  The dream, to time and nature's blended powers
  I gave this paradise for winter hours,
  A labyrinth Lady! which your feet shall rove.
  Yes! when the sun of life more feebly shines,
  Becoming thoughts, I trust, of solemn gloom
  Or of high gladness you shall hither bring;
  And these perennial bowers and murmuring pines
  Be gracious as the music and the bloom
  And all the mighty ravishment of Spring.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d 

  The world is too much with us; late and soon,
  Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers:
  Little we see in nature that is ours;
  We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!
  This Sea that bares her bosom to the moon;
  The Winds that will be howling at all hours
  And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers;
  For this, for every thing, we are out of tune;
  It moves us not--Great God! I'd rather be
  A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
  So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
  Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
  Have sight of Proteus coming from the sea;
  Or hear old Triton blow his wreathed horn.

TITLE

RHYME a b b c a d d c e f g e g f 

  It is a beauteous Evening, calm and free;
  The holy time is quiet as a Nun	
  Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
  Is sinking down in its tranquillity;	
  The gentleness of heaven is on the Sea:
  Listen! the mighty Being is awake	
  And doth with his eternal motion make	
  A sound like thunder--everlastingly.	
  Dear Child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here,
  If thou appear'st untouch'd by solemn thought,
  Thy nature is not therefore less divine:	
  Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year;	
  And worshipp'st at the Temple's inner shrine,	
  God being with thee when we know it not.	

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e c e d c 

  Calvert! it must not be unheard by them
  Who may respect my name that I to thee
  Ow'd many years of early liberty.	
  This care was thine when sickness did condemn
  Thy youth to hopeless wasting, root and stem:
  That I, if frugal and severe, might stray
  Where'er I liked; and finally array	
  My temples with the Muse's diadem.	
  Hence, if in freedom I have lov'd the truth,
  If there be aught of pure, or good, or great,
  In my past verse; or shall be, in the lays
  Of higher mood, which now I meditate,	
  It gladdens me, O worthy, short-lived Youth!
  To think how much of this will be thy praise.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e 

  Fair Star of Evening, Splendor of the West,	
  Star of my Country! on the horizon's brink	
  Thou hangest, stooping, as might seem, to sink
  On England's bosom; yet well pleas'd to rest,	
  Meanwhile, and be to her a glorious crest	
  Conspicuous to the Nations. Thou, I think,	
  Should'st be my Country's emblem; and should'st wink,
  Bright Star! with laughter on her banners, drest
  In thy fresh beauty. There! that dusky spot		
  Beneath thee, it is England; there it lies.
  Blessings be on you both! one hope, one lot,
  One life, one glory! I, with many a fear
  For my dear Country, many heartfelt sighs,
  Among Men who do not love her linger here.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d 

  Is it a Reed that's shaken by the wind,
  Or what is it that ye go forth to see?
  Lords, Lawyers, Statesmen, Squires of low degree,
  Men known, and men unknown, Sick, Lame, and Blind,
  Post forward all, like Creatures of one kind,
  With first-fruit offerings crowd to bend the knee
  In France, before the new-born Majesty.
  'Tis ever thus. Ye Men of prostrate mind!
  A seemly reverence may be paid to power;
  But that's a loyal virtue, never sown
  In haste, nor springing with a transient shower:
  When truth, when sense, when liberty were flown
  What hardship had it been to wait an hour?
  Shame on you, feeble Heads, to slavery prone!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d c d c 

  Jones! when from Calais southward you and I
  Travell'd on foot together; then this Way,
  Which I am pacing now, was like the May
  With festivals of new-born Liberty:
  A homeless sound of joy was in the Sky;
  The antiquated Earth, as one might say,
  Beat like the heart of Man: songs, garlands, play,
  Banners, and happy faces, far and nigh!
  And now, sole register that these things were,
  Two solitary greetings have I heard,
  "_Good morrow, Citizen_!" a hollow word,
  As if a dead Man spake it! Yet despair
  I feel not: happy am I as a Bird:
  Fair seasons yet will come, and hopes as fair.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b a b c d d c d c 

  I griev'd for Buonaparte, with a vain
  And an unthinking grief! the vital blood
  Of that Man's mind what can it be? What food
  Fed his first hopes? What knowledge could He gain?
  'Tis not in battles that from youth we train
  The Governor who must be wise and good,
  And temper with the sternness of the brain
  Thoughts motherly, and meek as womanhood.
  Wisdom doth live with children round her knees:
  Books, leisure, perfect freedom, and the talk
  Man holds with week-day man in the hourly walk
  Of the mind's business: these are the degrees
  By which true Sway doth mount; this is the stalk
  True Power doth grow on; and her rights are these.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e d e 

  Festivals have I seen that were not names:
  This is young Buonaparte's natal day;
  And his is henceforth an established sway,
  Consul for life. With worship France proclaims
  Her approbation, and with pomps and games.
  Heaven grant that other Cities may be gay!
  Calais is not: and I have bent my way
  To the Sea-coast, noting that each man frames
  His business as he likes. Another time
  That was, when I was here long years ago:
  The senselessness of joy was then sublime!
  Happy is he, who, caring not for Pope,
  Consul, or King, can sound himself to know
  The destiny of Man, and live in hope.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e d e 

  Once did She hold the gorgeous East in fee;
  And was the safeguard of the West: the worth
  Of Venice did not fall below her birth,
  Venice, the eldest Child of Liberty.
  She was a Maiden City, bright and free;
  No guile seduced, no force could violate;
  And when She took unto herself a Mate
  She must espouse the everlasting Sea.
  And what if she had seen those glories fade,
  Those titles vanish, and that strength decay,
  Yet shall some tribute of regret be paid
  When her long life hath reach'd its final day:
  Men are we, and must grieve when even the Shade
  Of that which once was great is pass'd away.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e e d 

  The Voice of Song from distant lands shall call
  To that great King; shall hail the crowned Youth
  Who, taking counsel of unbending Truth,
  By one example hath set forth to all
  How they with dignity may stand; or fall,
  If fall they must. Now, whither doth it tend?
  And what to him and his shall be the end?
  That thought is one which neither can appal
  Nor chear him; for the illustrious Swede hath done
  The thing which ought to be: He stands _above_
  All consequences: work he hath begun
  Of fortitude, and piety, and love,
  Which all his glorious Ancestors approve:
  The Heroes bless him, him their rightful Son.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d d c 

  Toussaint, the most unhappy Man of Men!
  Whether the rural Milk-maid by her Cow
  Sing in thy hearing, or thou liest now
  Alone in some deep dungeon's earless den,
  O miserable chieftain! where and when	
  Wilt thou find patience? Yet die not; do thou
  Wear rather in thy bonds a chearful brow:
  Though fallen Thyself, never to rise again,
  Live, and take comfort. Thou hast left behind
  Powers that will work for thee; air, earth, and skies;
  There's not a breathing of the common wind
  That will forget thee; thou hast great allies;
  Thy friends are exultations, agonies,
  And love, and Man's unconquerable mind.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e e c 

  We had a fellow-Passenger who came
  From Calais with us, gaudy in array,
  A Negro Woman like a Lady gay,
  Yet silent as a woman fearing blame;
  Dejected, meek, yea pitiably tame,
  She sate, from notice turning not away,
  But on our proffer'd kindness still did lay
  A weight of languid speech, or at the same
  Was silent, motionless in eyes and face.
  She was a Negro Woman driv'n from France,
  Rejected like all others of that race,
  Not one of whom may now find footing there;
  This the poor Out-cast did to us declare,
  Nor murmur'd at the unfeeling Ordinance.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d e c d e 

  Dear fellow Traveller! here we are once more.
  The Cock that crows, the Smoke that curls, that sound
  Of Bells, those Boys that in yon meadow-ground
  In white sleev'd shirts are playing by the score,
  And even this little River's gentle roar,
  All, all are English. Oft have I look'd round
  With joy in Kent's green vales; but never found
  Myself so satisfied in heart before.
  Europe is yet in Bonds; but let that pass,
  Thought for another moment. Thou art free
  My Country! and 'tis joy enough and pride
  For one hour's perfect bliss, to tread the grass
  Of England once again, and hear and see,
  With such a dear Companion at my side.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c c d c 

  Inland, within a hollow Vale, I stood,
  And saw, while sea was calm and air was clear,
  The Coast of France, the Coast of France how near!
  Drawn almost into frightful neighbourhood.
  I shrunk, for verily the barrier flood
  Was like a Lake, or River bright and fair,
  A span of waters; yet what power is there!
  What mightiness for evil and for good!
  Even so doth God protect us if we be
  Virtuous and wise: Winds blow, and Waters roll,
  Strength to the brave, and Power, and Deity,
  Yet in themselves are nothing! One decree
  Spake laws to _them_, and said that by the Soul
  Only the Nations shall be great and free.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d d a e e a 

  Two Voices are there; one is of the Sea,			
  One of the Mountains; each a mighty Voice:			
  In both from age to age Thou didst rejoice,			
  They were thy chosen Music, Liberty!				
  There came a Tyrant, and with holy glee			
  Thou fought'st against Him; but hast vainly striven;		
  Thou from thy Alpine Holds at length art driven,		
  Where not a torrent murmurs heard by thee.			
  Of one deep bliss thine ear hath been bereft:			
  Then cleave, O cleave to that which still is left!		
  For, high-soul'd Maid, what sorrow would it be		
  That mountain Floods should thunder as before,
  And Ocean bellow from his rocky shore,
  And neither awful Voice be heard by thee!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d e c e 

  O Friend! I know not which way I must look
  For comfort, being, as I am, opprest,
  To think that now our Life is only drest
  For shew; mean handywork of craftsman, cook,
  Or groom! We must run glittering like a Brook
  In the open sunshine, or we are unblest:
  The wealthiest man among us is the best:
  No grandeur now in nature or in book
  Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expence,
  This is idolatry; and these we adore:
  Plain living and high thinking are no more:
  The homely beauty of the good old cause
  Is gone; our peace, our fearful innocence,
  And pure religion breathing household laws.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d d e c e 

  Milton! thou should'st be living at this hour:
  England hath need of thee: she is a fen
  Of stagnant waters: altar, sword and pen,
  Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower,
  Have forfeited their ancient English dower
  Of inward happiness. We are selfish men;
  Oh! raise us up, return to us again;
  And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power.
  Thy soul was like a Star and dwelt apart:
  Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea;
  Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free,
  So didst thou travel on life's common way,
  In chearful godliness; and yet thy heart
  The lowliest duties on itself did lay.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c e e d 

  Great Men have been among us; hands that penn'd
  And tongues that utter'd wisdom, better none:
  The later Sydney, Marvel, Harrington,
  Young Vane, and others who call'd Milton Friend.
  These Moralists could act and comprehend:
  They knew how genuine glory was put on;
  Taught us how rightfully a nation shone
  In splendor: what strength was, that would not bend
  But in magnanimous meekness. France, 'tis strange,
  Hath brought forth no such souls as we had then.
  Perpetual emptiness! unceasing change!
  No single Volume paramount, no code,
  No master spirit, no determined road;
  But equally a want of Books and Men!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e d e 

  It is not to be thought of that the Flood
  Of British freedom, which to the open Sea
  Of the world's praise from dark antiquity
  Hath flowed, "with pomp of waters, unwithstood,"
  Road by which all might come and go that would,
  And bear out freights of worth to foreign lands;
  That this most famous Stream in Bogs and Sands
  Should perish; and to evil and to good
  Be lost for ever. In our Halls is hung
  Armoury of the invincible Knights of old:
  We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
  That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold
  Which Milton held. In every thing we are sprung
  Of Earth's first blood, have titles manifold.

TITLE

RHYME a b c a a b b a d e f e d f 

  When I have borne in memory what has tamed	
  Great Nations, how ennobling thoughts depart	
  When Men change Swords for Ledgers, and desert
  The Student's bower for gold, some fears unnamed
  I had, my Country! am I to be blamed?		
  But, when I think of Thee, and what Thou art,	
  Verily, in the bottom of my heart,		
  Of those unfilial fears I am ashamed.		
  But dearly must we prize thee; we who find	
  In thee a bulwark of the cause of men;	
  And I by my affection was beguiled.		
  What wonder, if a Poet, now and then,		
  Among the many movements of his mind,		
  Felt for thee as a Lover or a Child.		

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e e d e d 

  One might believe that natural miseries
  Had blasted France, and made of it a land
  Unfit for Men; and that in one great Band
  Her Sons were bursting forth, to dwell at ease.
  But 'tis a chosen soil, where sun and breeze
  Shed gentle favors; rural works are there;
  And ordinary business without care;
  Spot rich in all things that can soothe and please!
  How piteous then that there should be such dearth
  Of knowledge; that whole myriads should unite
  To work against themselves such fell despite:
  Should come in phrenzy and in drunken mirth,
  Impatient to put out the only light
  Of Liberty that yet remains on Earth!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e d e 

  There is a bondage which is worse to bear		
  Than his who breathes, by roof, and floor, and wall,	
  Pent in, a Tyrant's solitary Thrall:			
  'Tis his who walks about in the open air,		
  One of a Nation who, henceforth, must wear		
  Their fetters in their Souls. For who could be,	
  Who, even the best, in such condition, free		
  From self-reproach, reproach which he must share	
  With Human Nature? Never be it ours			
  To see the Sun how brightly it will shine,		
  And know that noble Feelings, manly Powers,		
  Instead of gathering strength must droop and pine,	
  And Earth with all her pleasant fruits and flowers	
  Fade, and participate in Man's decline.		

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e f e e f 

  These times touch money'd Worldlings with dismay:	
  Even rich men, brave by nature, taint the air		
  With words of apprehension and despair:		
  While tens of thousands, thinking on the affray,	
  Men unto whom sufficient for the day			
  And minds not stinted or untill'd are given,		
  Sound, healthy Children of the God of Heaven,		
  Are cheerful as the rising Sun in May.		
  What do we gather hence but firmer faith		
  That every gift of noble origin			
  Is breathed upon by Hope's perpetual breath;		
  That virtue and the faculties within			
  Are vital, and that riches are akin			
  To fear, to change, to cowardice, and death!		

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c d a e f e f f e 

  England! the time is come when thou shouldst wean
  Thy heart from its emasculating food;		
  The truth should now be better understood;	
  Old things have been unsettled; we have seen	
  Fair seed-time, better harvest might have been
  But for thy trespasses; and, at this day,	
  If for Greece, Egypt, India, Africa,		
  Aught good were destined, Thou wouldst step between.
  England! all nations in this charge agree:	
  But worse, more ignorant in love and hate,	
  Far, far more abject is thine Enemy:		
  Therefore the wise pray for thee, though the freight
  Of thy offences be a heavy weight:		
  Oh grief! that Earth's best hopes rest all with Thee!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e e d f f 

  When, looking on the present face of things,
  I see one Man, of Men the meanest too!
  Rais'd up to sway the World, to do, undo,
  With mighty Nations for his Underlings,
  The great events with which old story rings
  Seem vain and hollow; I find nothing great;
  Nothing is left which I can venerate;
  So that almost a doubt within me springs
  Of Providence, such emptiness at length
  Seems at the heart of all things. But, great God!
  I measure back the steps which I have trod,
  And tremble, seeing, as I do, the strength
  Of such poor Instruments, with thoughts sublime
  I tremble at the sorrow of the time.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d c d c d 

  Vanguard of Liberty, ye Men of Kent,
  Ye Children of a Soil that doth advance
  It's haughty brow against the coast of France,
  Now is the time to prove your hardiment!
  To France be words of invitation sent!
  They from their Fields can see the countenance
  Of your fierce war, may ken the glittering lance.
  And hear you shouting forth your brave intent.
  Left single, in bold parley, Ye, of yore,
  Did from the Norman win a gallant wreath;
  Confirm'd the charters that were yours before;--
  No parleying now! In Britain is one breath;
  We all are with you now from Shore to Shore:--
  Ye Men of Kent, 'tis Victory or Death!

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e d e 

  Six thousand Veterans practis'd in War's game,
  Tried Men, at Killicranky were array'd
  Against an equal Host that wore the Plaid,
  Shepherds and Herdsmen.--Like a whirlwind came
  The Highlanders, the slaughter spread like flame;
  And Garry thundering down his mountain-road
  Was stopp'd, and could not breathe beneath the load
  Of the dead bodies. 'Twas a day of shame
  For them whom precept and the pedantry
  Of cold mechanic battle do enslave.
  Oh! for a single hour of that Dundee
  Who on that day the word of onset gave!
  Like conquest would the Men of England see;
  And her Foes find a like inglorious Grave.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a b b a c d e e c d 

  Shout, for a mighty Victory is won!
  On British ground the Invaders are laid low;
  The breath of Heaven has drifted them like snow,
  And left them lying in the silent sun,
  Never to rise again!--the work is done.
  Come forth, ye Old Men, now in peaceful show
  And greet your Sons! drums beat, and trumpets blow!
  Make merry, Wives! ye little Children stun
  Your Grandame's ears with pleasure of your noise!
  Clap, Infants, clap your hands! Divine must be
  That triumph, when the very worst, the pain,
  And even the prospect of our Brethren slain,
  Hath something in it which the heart enjoys:--
  In glory will they sleep and endless sanctity.

TITLE

RHYME a b b a a c c a d e d e d e 

  Another year!--another deadly blow!
  Another mighty Empire overthrown!
  And we are left, or shall be left, alone;
  The last that dares to struggle with the Foe.
  'Tis well! from this day forward we shall know
  That in ourselves our safety must be sought;
  That by our own right hands it must be wrought,
  That we must stand unpropp'd, or be laid low.
  O Dastard whom such foretaste doth not cheer!
  We shall exult, if They who rule the land
  Be Men who hold its many blessings dear,
  Wise, upright, valiant; not a venal Band,
  Who are to judge of danger which they fear,
  And honour which they do not understand.

TITLE The Female Vagrant

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    By Derwent's side my Father's cottage stood,
    (The Woman thus her artless story told)
    One field, a flock, and what the neighbouring flood
    Supplied, to him were more than mines of gold.
    Light was my sleep; my days in transport roll'd:
    With thoughtless joy I stretch'd along the shore
    My father's nets, or watched, when from the fold
    High o'er the cliffs I led my fleecy store,
    A dizzy depth below! his boat and twinkling oar.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    My father was a good and pious man,
    An honest man by honest parents bred,
    And I believe that, soon as I began
    To lisp, he made me kneel beside my bed,
    And in his hearing there my prayers I said:
    And afterwards, by my good father taught,
    I read, and loved the books in which I read;
    For books in every neighbouring house I sought,
    And nothing to my mind a sweeter pleasure brought.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Can I forget what charms did once adorn
    My garden, stored with pease, and mint, and thyme,
    And rose and lilly for the sabbath morn?
    The sabbath bells, and their delightful chime;
    The gambols and wild freaks at shearing time;
    My hen's rich nest through long grass scarce espied;
    The cowslip-gathering at May's dewy prime;
    The swans, that, when I sought the water-side,
    From far to meet me came, spreading their snowy pride.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    The staff I yet remember which upbore
    The bending body of my active sire;
    His seat beneath the honeyed sycamore
    When the bees hummed, and chair by winter fire;
    When market-morning came, the neat attire
    With which, though bent on haste, myself I deck'd;
    My watchful dog, whose starts of furious ire,
    When stranger passed, so often I have check'd;
    The red-breast known for years, which at my casement peck'd.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    The suns of twenty summers danced along,--
    Ah! little marked, how fast they rolled away:
    Then rose a mansion proud our woods among,
    And cottage after cottage owned its sway,
    No joy to see a neighbouring house, or stray
    Through pastures not his own, the master took;
    My Father dared his greedy wish gainsay;
    He loved his old hereditary nook,
    And ill could I the thought of such sad parting brook.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    But, when he had refused the proffered gold,
    To cruel injuries he became a prey,
    Sore traversed in whate'er he bought and sold:
    His troubles grew upon him day by day,
    Till all his substance fell into decay.
    His little range of water was denied;
    All but the bed where his old body lay,
    All, all was seized, and weeping, side by side,
    We sought a home where we uninjured might abide.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Can I forget that miserable hour,
    When from the last hill-top, my sire surveyed,
    Peering above the trees, the steeple tower,
    That on his marriage-day sweet music made?
    Till then he hoped his bones might there be laid,
    Close by my mother in their native bowers:
    Bidding me trust in God, he stood and prayed,--
    I could not pray:--through tears that fell in showers,
    Glimmer'd our dear-loved home, alas! no longer ours!

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    There was a youth whom I had loved so long,
    That when I loved him not I cannot say.
    'Mid the green mountains many and many a song
    We two had sung, like little birds in May.
    When we began to tire of childish play
    We seemed still more and more to prize each other:
    We talked of marriage and our marriage day;
    And I in truth did love him like a brother,
    For never could I hope to meet with such another.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    His father said, that to a distant town
    He must repair, to ply the artist's trade.
    What tears of bitter grief till then unknown!
    What tender vows our last sad kiss delayed!
    To him we turned:--we had no other aid.
    Like one revived, upon his neck I wept,
    And her whom he had loved in joy, he said
    He well could love in grief: his faith he kept;
    And in a quiet home once more my father slept.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Four years each day with daily bread was blest,
    By constant toil and constant prayer supplied.
    Three lovely infants lay upon my breast;
    And often, viewing their sweet smiles, I sighed,
    And knew not why. My happy father died
    When sad distress reduced the children's meal:
    Thrice happy! that from him the grave did hide
    The empty loom, cold hearth, and silent wheel,
    And tears that flowed for ills which patience could not heal.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    'Twas a hard change, an evil time was come;
    We had no hope, and no relief could gain.
    But soon, with proud parade, the noisy drum
    Beat round, to sweep the streets of want and pain.
    My husband's arms now only served to strain
    Me and his children hungering in his view:
    In such dismay my prayers and tears were vain:
    To join those miserable men he flew;
    And now to the sea-coast, with numbers more, we drew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

   There foul neglect for months and months we bore,
    Nor yet the crowded fleet its anchor stirred.
    Green fields before us and our native shore,
    By fever, from polluted air incurred,
    Ravage was made, for which no knell was heard.
    Fondly we wished, and wished away, nor knew,
    'Mid that long sickness, and those hopes deferr'd,
    That happier days we never more must view:
    The parting signal streamed, at last the land withdrew,

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    But from delay the summer calms were past.
    On as we drove, the equinoctial deep
    Ran mountains--high before the howling blaft.
    We gazed with terror on the gloomy sleep
    Of them that perished in the whirlwind's sweep,
    Untaught that soon such anguish must ensue,
    Our hopes such harvest of affliction reap,
    That we the mercy of the waves should rue.
    We reached the western world, a poor, devoted crew.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Oh! dreadful price of being to resign
    All that is dear _in_ being! better far
    In Want's most lonely cave till death to pine,
    Unseen, unheard, unwatched by any star;
    Or in the streets and walks where proud men are,
    Better our dying bodies to obtrude,
    Than dog-like, wading at the heels of war,
    Protract a curst existence, with the brood
    That lap (their very nourishment!) their brother's blood.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    The pains and plagues that on our heads came down,
    Disease and famine, agony and fear,
    In wood or wilderness, in camp or town,
    It would thy brain unsettle even to hear.
    All perished--all, in one remorseless year,
    Husband and children! one by one, by sword
    And ravenous plague, all perished: every tear
    Dried up, despairing, desolate, on board
    A British ship I waked, as from a trance restored.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Peaceful as some immeasurable plain
    By the first beams of dawning light impress'd,
    In the calm sunshine slept the glittering main.
    The very ocean has its hour of rest,
    That comes not to the human mourner's breast.
    Remote from man, and storms of mortal care,
    A heavenly silence did the waves invest;
    I looked and looked along the silent air,
    Until it seemed to bring a joy to my despair.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Ah! how unlike those late terrific sleeps!
    And groans, that rage of racking famine spoke,
    Where looks inhuman dwelt on festering heaps!
    The breathing pestilence that rose like smoke!
    The shriek that from the distant battle broke!
    The mine's dire earthquake, and the pallid host
    Driven by the bomb's incessant thunder-stroke
    To loathsome vaults, where heart-sick anguish toss'd,
    Hope died, and fear itself in agony was lost!

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Yet does that burst of woe congeal my frame,
    When the dark streets appeared to heave and gape,
    While like a sea the storming army came,
    And Fire from Hell reared his gigantic shape,
    And Murder, by the ghastly gleam, and Rape
    Seized their joint prey, the mother and the child!
    But from these crazing thoughts my brain, escape!
    --For weeks the balmy air breathed soft and mild,
    And on the gliding vessel Heaven and Ocean smiled.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Some mighty gulph of separation past,
    I seemed transported to another world:--
    A thought resigned with pain, when from the mast
    The impatient mariner the sail unfurl'd,
    And whistling, called the wind that hardly curled
    The silent sea. From the sweet thoughts of home,
    And from all hope I was forever hurled.
    For me--farthest from earthly port to roam
    Was best, could I but shun the spot where man might come.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    And oft, robb'd of my perfect mind, I thought
    At last my feet a resting-place had found:
    Here will I weep in peace, (so fancy wrought,)
    Roaming the illimitable waters round;
    Here watch, of every human friend disowned,
    All day, my ready tomb the ocean-flood--
    To break my dream the vessel reached its bound:
    And homeless near a thousand homes I stood,
    And near a thousand tables pined, and wanted food.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    By grief enfeebled was I turned adrift,
    Helpless as sailor cast on desart rock;
    Nor morsel to my mouth that day did lift,
    Nor dared my hand at any door to knock.
    I lay, where with his drowsy mates, the cock
    From the cross timber of an out-house hung;
    How dismal tolled, that night, the city clock!
    At morn my sick heart hunger scarcely stung,
    Nor to the beggar's language could I frame my tongue.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    So passed another day, and so the third:
    Then did I try, in vain, the crowd's resort,
    In deep despair by frightful wishes stirr'd,
    Near the sea-side I reached a ruined fort:
    There, pains which nature could no more support,
    With blindness linked, did on my vitals fall;
    Dizzy my brain, with interruption short
    Of hideous sense; I sunk, nor step could crawl,
    And thence was borne away to neighbouring hospital.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Recovery came with food: but still, my brain
    Was weak, nor of the past had memory.
    I heard my neighbours, in their beds, complain
    Of many things which never troubled me;
    Of feet still bustling round with busy glee,
    Of looks where common kindness had no part,
    Of service done with careless cruelty,
    Fretting the fever round the languid heart,
    And groans, which, as they said, would make a dead man start.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    These things just served to stir the torpid sense,
    Nor pain nor pity in my bosom raised.
    Memory, though slow, returned with strength; and thence
    Dismissed, again on open day I gazed,
    At houses, men, and common light, amazed.
    The lanes I sought, and as the sun retired,
    Came, where beneath the trees a faggot blazed;
    The wild brood saw me weep, my fate enquired,
    And gave me food, and rest, more welcome, more desired.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    My heart is touched to think that men like these,
    The rude earth's tenants, were my first relief:
    How kindly did they paint their vagrant ease!
    And their long holiday that feared not grief,
    For all belonged to all, and each was chief.
    No plough their sinews strained; on grating road
    No wain they drove, and yet, the yellow sheaf
    In every vale for their delight was stowed:
    For them, in nature's meads, the milky udder flowed.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Semblance, with straw and pauniered ass, they made
    Of potters wandering on from door to door:
    But life of happier sort to me pourtrayed,
    And other joys my fancy to allure;
    The bag-pipe dinning on the midnight moor
    In barn uplighted, and companions boon
    Well met from far with revelry secure,
    In depth of forest glade, when jocund June
    Rolled fast along the sky his warm and genial moon.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    But ill it suited me, in journey dark
    O'er moor and mountain, midnight theft to hatch;
    To charm the surly house-dog's faithful bark.
    Or hang on tiptoe at the lifted latch;
    The gloomy lantern, and the dim blue match,
    The black disguise, the warning whistle shrill,
    And ear still busy on its nightly watch,
    Were not for me, brought up in nothing ill;
    Besides, on griefs so fresh my thoughts were brooding still.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    What could I do, unaided and unblest?
    Poor Father! gone was every friend of thine:
    And kindred of dead husband are at best
    Small help, and, after marriage such as mine,
    With little kindness would to me incline.
    Ill was I then for toil or service fit:
    With tears whose course no effort could confine,
    By high-way side forgetful would I sit
    Whole hours, my idle arms in moping sorrow knit.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    I lived upon the mercy of the fields,
    And oft of cruelty the sky accused;
    On hazard, or what general bounty yields,
    Now coldly given, now utterly refused,
    The fields I for my bed have often used:
    But, what afflicts my peace with keenest ruth
    Is, that I have my inner self abused,
    Foregone the home delight of constant truth,
    And clear and open soul, so prized in fearless youth.

RHYME a b a b b c b c c 

    Three years a wanderer, often have I view'd,
    In tears, the sun towards that country tend
    Where my poor heart lost all its fortitude:
    And now across this moor my steps I bend--
    Oh! tell me whither--for no earthly friend
    Have I.--She ceased, and weeping turned away,
    As if because her tale was at an end
    She wept;--because she had no more to say
    Of that perpetual weight which on her spirit lay.

TITLE Goody Blake and Harry Gill

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Oh! what's the matter? what's the matter?
    What is't that ails young Harry Gill?
    That evermore his teeth they chatter,
    Chatter, chatter, chatter still.
    Of waistcoats Harry has no lack,
    Good duffle grey, and flannel fine;
    He has a blanket on his back,
    And coats enough to smother nine.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    In March, December, and in July,
    "Tis all the same with Harry Gill;
    The neighbours tell, and tell you truly,
    His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
    At night, at morning, and at noon,
    'Tis all the same with Harry Gill;
    Beneath the sun, beneath the moon,
    His teeth they chatter, chatter still.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Young Harry was a lusty drover,
    And who so stout of limb as he?
    His cheeks were red as ruddy clover,
    His voice was like the voice of three.
    Auld Goody Blake was old and poor,
    Ill fedd she was, and thinly clad;
    And any man who pass'd her door,
    Might see how poor a hut she had.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    All day she spun in her poor dwelling,
    And then her three hours' work at night!
    Alas! 'twas hardly worth the telling,
    It would not pay for candle-light.
    --This woman dwelt in Dorsetshire,
    Her hut was on a cold hill-side,
    And in that country coals are dear,
    For they come far by wind and tide.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    By the same fire to boil their pottage,
    Two poor old dames, as I have known,
    Will often live in one small cottage,
    But she, poor woman, dwelt alone.
    'Twas well enough when summer came,
    The long, warm, lightsome summer-day,
    Then at her door the _canty_ dame
    Would sit, as any linnet gay.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    But when the ice our streams did fetter,
    Oh! then how her old bones would shake!
    You would have said, if you had met her,
    'Twas a hard time for Goody Blake.
    Her evenings then were dull and dead;
    Sad case it was, as you may think,
    For very cold to go to bed,
    And then for cold not sleep a wink.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Oh joy for her! when e'er in winter
    The winds at night had made a rout,
    And scatter'd many a lusty splinter,
    And many a rotten bough about.
    Yet never had she, well or sick,
    As every man who knew her says,
    A pile before-hand, wood or stick,
    Enough to warm her for three days.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Now, when the frost was past enduring,
    And made her poor old bones to ache,
    Could any thing be more alluring,
    Than an old hedge to Goody Blake?
    And now and then, it must be said,
    When her old bones were cold and chill,
    She left her fire, or left her bed,
    To seek the hedge of Harry Gill.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Now Harry he had long suspected
    This trespass of old Goody Blake,
    And vow'd that she should be detected,
    And he on her would vengeance take.
    And oft from his warm fire he'd go,
    And to the fields his road would take,
    And there, at night, in frost and snow,
    He watch'd to seize old Goody Blake.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    And once, behind a rick of barley,
    Thus looking out did Harry stand;
    The moon was full and shining clearly,
    And crisp with frost the stubble-land.
    --He hears a noise--he's all awake--
    Again?--on tip-toe down the hill
    He softly creeps--'Tis Goody Blake,
    She's at the hedge of Harry Gill.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Right glad was he when he beheld her:
    Stick after stick did Goody pull,
    He stood behind a bush of elder,
    Till she had filled her apron full.
    When with her load she turned about,
    The bye-road back again to take,
    He started forward with a shout,
    And sprang upon poor Goody Blake.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    And fiercely by the arm he took her,
    And by the arm he held her fast,
    And fiercely by the arm he shook her,
    And cried, "I've caught you then at last!"
    Then Goody, who had nothing said,
    Her bundle from her lap let fall;
    And kneeling on the sticks, she pray'd
    To God that is the judge of all.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    She pray'd, her wither'd hand uprearing,
    While Harry held her by the arm--
    "God! who art never out of hearing,
    "O may he never more be warm!"
    The cold, cold moon above her head,
    Thus on her knees did Goody pray,
    Young Harry heard what she had said,
    And icy-cold he turned away.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    He went complaining all the morrow
    That he was cold and very chill:
    His face was gloom, his heart was sorrow,
    Alas! that day for Harry Gill!
    That day he wore a riding-coat,
    But not a whit the warmer he:
    Another was on Thursday brought,
    And ere the Sabbath he had three.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    'Twas all in vain, a useless matter,
    And blankets were about him pinn'd;
    Yet still his jaws and teeth they clatter,
    Like a loose casement in the wind.
    And Harry's flesh it fell away;
    And all who see him say 'tis plain,
    That, live as long as live he may,
    He never will be warm again.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    No word to any man he utters,
    A-bed or up, to young or old;
    But ever to himself he mutters,
    "Poor Harry Gill is very cold."
    A-bed or up, by night or day;
    His teeth they chatter, chatter still.
    Now think, ye farmers all, I pray,
    Of Goody Blake and Harry Gill.

TITLE To My Sister

RHYME a b a b 

   It is the first mild day of March:
   Each minute sweeter than before,
   The red-breast sings from the tall larch
   That stands beside our door.

RHYME a b a b 

   There is a blessing in the air,
   Which seems a sense of joy to yield
   To the bare trees, and mountains bare,
   And grass in the green field.

RHYME a b a b 

   My Sister! ('tis a wish of mine)
   Now that our morning meal is done,
   Make haste, your morning task resign;
   Come forth and feel the sun.

RHYME a b a b 

   Edward will come with you, and pray,
   Put on with speed your woodland dress,
   And bring no book, for this one day
   We'll give to idleness.

RHYME a b a b 

   No joyless forms shall regulate
   Our living Calendar:
   We from to-day, my friend, will date
   The opening of the year.

RHYME a b a b 

   Love, now an universal birth.
   From heart to heart is stealing,
   From earth to man, from man to earth,
   --It is the hour of feeling.

RHYME a b a b 

   One moment now may give us more
   Than fifty years of reason;
   Our minds shall drink at every pore
   The spirit of the season.

RHYME a b a b 

   Some silent laws our hearts may make,
   Which they shall long obey;
   We for the year to come may take
   Our temper from to-day.

RHYME a b a b 

   And from the blessed power that rolls
   About, below, above;
   We'll frame the measure of our souls,
   They shall be tuned to love.

RHYME a b a b 

   Then come, my sister! come, I pray,
   With speed put on your woodland dress,
   And bring no book; for this one day
   We'll give to idleness.

TITLE The Old Huntsman

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    In the sweet shire of Cardigan,
    Not far from pleasant Ivor-hall,
    An old man dwells, a little man,
    I've heard he once was tall.
    Of years he has upon his back,
    No doubt, a burthen weighty;
    He says he is three score and ten,
    But others say he's eighty.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    A long blue livery-coat has he,
    That's fair behind, and fair before;
    Yet, meet him where you will, you see
    At once that he is poor.
    Full five and twenty years he lived
    A running huntsman merry;
    And, though he has but one eye left,
    His cheek is like a cherry.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    No man like him the horn could sound.
    And no man was so full of glee;
    To say the least, four counties round
    Had heard of Simon Lee;
    His master's dead, and no one now
    Dwells in the hall of Ivor;
    Men, dogs, and horses, all are dead;
    He is the sole survivor.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    His hunting feats have him bereft
    Of his right eye, as you may see:
    And then, what limbs those feats have left
    To poor old Simon Lee!
    He has no son, he has no child,
    His wife, an aged woman,
    Lives with him, near the waterfall,
    Upon the village common.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    And he is lean and he is sick,
    His little body's half awry
    His ancles they are swoln and thick
    His legs are thin and dry.
    When he was young he little knew
    Of husbandry or tillage;
    And now he's forced to work, though weak,
    --The weakest in the village.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    He all the country could outrun,
    Could leave both man and horse behind;
    And often, ere the race was done,
    He reeled and was stone-blind.
    And still there's something in the world
    At which his heart rejoices;
    For when the chiming hounds are out,
    He dearly loves their voices!

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    Old Ruth works out of doors with him,
    And does what Simon cannot do;
    For she, not over stout of limb,
    Is stouter of the two.
    And though you with your utmost skill
    From labour could not wean them,
    Alas! 'tis very little, all
    Which they can do between them.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    Beside their moss-grown hut of clay,
    Not twenty paces from the door,
    A scrap of land they have, but they
    Are poorest of the poor.
    This scrap of land he from the heath
    Enclosed when he was stronger;
    But what avails the land to them,
    Which they can till no longer?

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    Few months of life has he in store,
    As he to you will tell,
    For still, the more he works, the more
    His poor old ancles swell.
    My gentle reader, I perceive
    How patiently you've waited,
    And I'm afraid that you expect
    Some tale will be related.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    O reader! had you in your mind
    Such stores as silent thought can bring,
    O gentle reader! you would find
    A tale in every thing.
    What more I have to say is short,
    I hope you'll kindly take it;
    It is no tale; but should you think,
    Perhaps a tale you'll make it.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    One summer-day I chanced to see
    This old man doing all he could
    About the root of an old tree,
    A stump of rotten wood.
    The mattock totter'd in his hand;
    So vain was his endeavour
    That at the root of the old tree
    He might have worked for ever.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    "You're overtasked, good Simon Lee,
    Give me your tool" to him I said;
    And at the word right gladly he
    Received my proffer'd aid.
    I struck, and with a single blow
    The tangled root I sever'd,
    At which the poor old man so long
    And vainly had endeavour'd.

RHYME a b a b c d e d 

    The tears into his eyes were brought,
    And thanks and praises seemed to run
    So fast out of his heart, I thought
    They never would have done.
    --I've heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
    With coldness still returning.
    Alas! the gratitude of men
    Has oftner left me mourning.

TITLE Anecdote for Fathers

RHYME a b a b 

    I have a boy of five years old,
    His face is fair and fresh to see;
    His limbs are cast in beauty's mould,
    And dearly he loves me.

RHYME a b a b 

    One morn we stroll'd on our dry walk,
    Our quiet house all full in view,
    And held such intermitted talk
    As we are wont to do.

RHYME a b a b 

    My thoughts on former pleasures ran;
    I thought of Kilve's delightful shore,
    My pleasant home, when spring began,
    A long, long year before.

RHYME a b a b 

    A day it was when I could bear
    To think, and think, and think again;
    With so much happiness to spare,
    I could not feel a pain.

RHYME a b a b 

    My boy was by my side, so slim
    And graceful in his rustic dress!
    And oftentimes I talked to him,
    In very idleness.

RHYME a b a b 

   The young lambs ran a pretty race;
    The morning sun shone bright and warm;
    "Kilve," said I, "was a pleasant place,
    "And so is Liswyn farm.

RHYME a b a b 

    "My little boy, which like you more,"
    I said and took him by the arm--
    "Our home by Kilve's delightful shore,
    "Or here at Liswyn farm?"

RHYME a b a b 

    "And tell me, had you rather be,"
    I said and held him by the arm,
    "At Kilve's smooth shore by the green sea,
    "Or here at Liswyn farm?"

RHYME a b a b 

    In careless mood he looked at me,
    While still I held him by the arm,
    And said, "At Kilve I'd rather be
    "Than here at Liswyn farm."

RHYME a b a b 

    "Now, little Edward, say why so;
    My little Edward, tell me why;"
    "I cannot tell, I do not know,"
    "Why this is strange," said I.

RHYME a b a b 

    "For, here are woods and green-hills warm;
    "There surely must some reason be
    "Why you would change sweet Liswyn farm
    "For Kilve by the green sea."

RHYME a b a b 

    At this, my boy, so fair and slim,
    Hung down his head, nor made reply;
    And five times did I say to him,
    "Why? Edward, tell me why?"

RHYME a b a b 

    His head he raised--there was in sight,
    It caught his eye, he saw it plain--
    Upon the house-top, glittering bright,
    A broad and gilded vane.

RHYME a b a b 

    Then did the boy his tongue unlock,
    And thus to me he made reply;
    "At Kilve there was no weather-cock,
    "And that's the reason why."

RHYME a b a b 

    Oh dearest, dearest boy! my heart
    For better lore would seldom yearn,
    Could I but teach the hundredth part
    Of what from thee I learn.

TITLE We Are Seven

RHYME a b a b

    A simple child, dear brother Jim,
    That lightly draws its breath,
    And feels its life in every limb,
    What should it know of death?

RHYME a b a b

    I met a little cottage girl,
    She was eight years old, she said;
    Her hair was thick with many a curl
    That cluster'd round her head.

RHYME a b a b

    She had a rustic, woodland air,
    And she was wildly clad;
    Her eyes were fair, and very fair,
    --Her beauty made me glad.

RHYME a b a b

    "Sisters and brothers, little maid,
    "How many may you be?"
    "How many? seven in all," she said,
    And wondering looked at me.

RHYME a b a b

    "And where are they, I pray you tell?"
    She answered, "Seven are we,
    "And two of us at Conway dwell,
    "And two are gone to sea.

RHYME a b a b

    "Two of us in the church-yard lie,
    "My sister and my brother,
    "And in the church-yard cottage, I
    "Dwell near them with my mother."

RHYME a b a b

    "You say that two at Conway dwell,
    "And two are gone to sea,
    "Yet you are seven; I pray you tell
    "Sweet Maid, how this may be?"

RHYME a b a b

    Then did the little Maid reply,
    "Seven boys and girls are we;
    "Two of us in the church-yard lie,
    "Beneath the church-yard tree."

RHYME a b a b

    "You run about, my little maid,
    "Your limbs they are alive;
    "If two are in the church-yard laid,
    "Then ye are only five."

RHYME a b c b 

    "Their graves are green, they may be seen,"
    The little Maid replied,
    "Twelve steps or more from my mother's door,
    "And they are side by side.

RHYME a b a b 

    "My stockings there I often knit,
    "My 'kerchief there I hem;
    "And there upon the ground I sit--
    "I sit and sing to them.

RHYME a b a b

    "And often after sunset, Sir,
    "When it is light and fair,
    "I take my little porringer,
    "And eat my supper there.

RHYME a b a b

    "The first that died was little Jane;
    "In bed she moaning lay,
    "Till God released her of her pain,
    "And then she went away.

RHYME a b a b

    "So in the church-yard she was laid,
    "And all the summer dry,
    "Together round her grave we played,
    "My brother John and I.

RHYME a b a b

    "And when the ground was white with snow,
    "And I could run and slide,
    "My brother John was forced to go,
    "And he lies by her side."

RHYME a b a b

    "How many are you then," said I,
    "If they two are in Heaven?"
    The little Maiden did reply,
    "O Master! we are seven."

RHYME a b c c b 

    "But they are dead; those two are dead!
    "Their spirits are in heaven!"
    'Twas throwing words away; for still
    The little Maid would have her will,
    And said, "Nay, we are seven!"

TITLE Lines Written In Early Spring

RHYME a b a b 

    I heard a thousand blended notes,
    While in a grove I sate reclined,
    In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts
    Bring sad thoughts to the mind.

RHYME a b a b 

    To her fair works did nature link
    The human soul that through me ran;
    And much it griev'd my heart to think
    What man has made of man.

RHYME a b a b 

    Through primrose-tufts, in that sweet bower,
    The periwinkle trail'd its wreathes;
    And 'tis my faith that every flower
    Enjoys the air it breathes.

RHYME a b a b 

    The birds around me hopp'd and play'd:
    Their thoughts I cannot measure,
    But the least motion which they made,
    It seem'd a thrill of pleasure.

RHYME a b a b 

    The budding twigs spread out their fan,
    To catch the breezy air;
    And I must think, do all I can,
    That there was pleasure there.

RHYME a b a b 

    If I these thoughts may not prevent,
    If such be of my creed the plan,
    Have I not reason to lament
    What man has made of man?

TITLE The Last of the Flock

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    In distant countries I have been,
    And yet I have not often seen
    A healthy man, a man full grown
    Weep in the public roads alone.
    But such a one, on English ground,
    And in the broad high-way, I met;
    Along the broad high-way he came,
    His cheeks with tears were wet.
    Sturdy he seemed, though he was sad;
    And in his arms a lamb he had.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    He saw me, and he turned aside,
    As if he wished himself to hide:
    Then with his coat he made essay
    To wipe those briny tears away.
    I follow'd him, and said, "My friend
    "What ails you? wherefore weep you so?"
    --"Shame on me, Sir! this lusty lamb,
    He makes my tears to flow.
    To-day I fetched him from the rock;
    He is the last of all my flock.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    When I was young, a single man.
    And after youthful follies ran,
    Though little given to care and thought,
    Yet, so it was, a ewe I bought;
    And other sheep from her I raised,
    As healthy sheep as you might see,
    And then I married, and was rich
    As I could wish to be;
    Of sheep I number'd a full score,
    And every year encreas'd my store.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    Year after year my stock it grew,
    And from this one, this single ewe,
    Full fifty comely sheep I raised,
    As sweet a flock as ever grazed!
    Upon the mountain did they feed;
    They throve, and we at home did thrive.
    --This lusty lamb of all my store
    Is all that is alive:
    And now I care not if we die,
    And perish all of poverty.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    Ten children, Sir! had I to feed,
    Hard labour in a time of need!
    My pride was tamed, and in our grief,
    I of the parish ask'd relief.
    They said I was a wealthy man;
    My sheep upon the mountain fed,
    And it was fit that thence I took
    Whereof to buy us bread:"
    "Do this; how can we give to you,"
    They cried, "what to the poor is due?"

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    I sold a sheep as they had said,
    And bought my little children bread,
    And they were healthy with their food;
    For me it never did me good.
    A woeful time it was for me,
    To see the end of all my gains,
    The pretty flock which I had reared
    With all my care and pains,
    To see it melt like snow away!
    For me it was a woeful day.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    Another still! and still another!
    A little lamb, and then its mother!
    It was a vein that never stopp'd,
    Like blood-drops from my heart they dropp'd.
    Till thirty were not left alive
    They dwindled, dwindled, one by one,
    And I may say that many a time
    I wished they all were gone:
    They dwindled one by one away;
    For me it was a woeful day.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    To wicked deeds I was inclined,
    And wicked fancies cross'd my mind,
    And every man I chanc'd to see,
    I thought he knew some ill of me
    No peace, no comfort could I find,
    No ease, within doors or without,
    And crazily, and wearily,
    I went my work about.
    Oft-times I thought to run away;
    For me it was a woeful day.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    Sir! 'twas a precious flock to me,
    As dear as my own children be;
    For daily with my growing store
    I loved my children more and more.
    Alas! it was an evil time;
    God cursed me in my sore distress,
    I prayed, yet every day I thought
    I loved my children less;
    And every week, and every day,
    My flock, it seemed to melt away.

RHYME a a b b c d e d f f 

    They dwindled, Sir, sad sight to see!
    From ten to five, from five to three,
    A lamb, a weather, and a ewe;
    And then at last, from three to two;
    And of my fifty, yesterday
    I had but only one,
    And here it lies upon my arm,
    Alas! and I have none;
    To-day I fetched it from the rock;
    It is the last of all my flock."

TITLE Her Eyes Are Wild

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Her eyes are wild, her head is bare,
    The sun has burnt her coal-black hair,
    Her eye-brows have a rusty stain,
    And she came far from over the main.
    She has a baby on her arm,
    Or else she were alone;
    And underneath the hay-stack warm,
    And on the green-wood stone,
    She talked and sung the woods among;
    And it was in the English tongue.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    "Sweet babe! they say that I am mad,
    But nay, my heart is far too glad;
    And I am happy when I sing
    Full many a sad and doleful thing:
    Then, lovely baby, do not fear!
    I pray thee have no fear of me,
    But, safe as in a cradle, here
    My lovely baby! thou shalt be,
    To thee I know too much I owe;
    I cannot work thee any woe.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    A fire was once within my brain;
    And in my head a dull, dull pain;
    And fiendish faces one, two, three,
    Hung at my breasts, and pulled at me.
    But then there came a sight of joy;
    It came at once to do me good;
    I waked, and saw my little boy,
    My little boy of flesh and blood;
    Oh joy for me that sight to see!
    For he was here, and only he.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Suck, little babe, oh suck again!
    It cools my blood; it cools my brain;
    Thy lips I feel them, baby! they
    Draw from my heart the pain away.
    Oh! press me with thy little hand;
    It loosens something at my chest;
    About that tight and deadly band
    I feel thy little fingers press'd.
    The breeze I see is in the tree;
    It comes to cool my babe and me.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Oh! love me, love me, little boy!
    Thou art thy mother's only joy;
    And do not dread the waves below,
    When o'er the sea-rock's edge we go;
    The high crag cannot work me harm,
    Nor leaping torrents when they howl;
    The babe I carry on my arm,
    He saves for me my precious soul;
    Then happy lie, for blest am I;
    Without me my sweet babe would die.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Then do not fear, my boy! for thee
    Bold as a lion I will be;
    And I will always be thy guide,
    Through hollow snows and rivers wide.
    I'll build an Indian bower; I know
    The leaves that make the softest bed:
    And if from me thou wilt not go,
    But still be true 'till I am dead,
    My pretty thing! then thou shalt sing,
    As merry as the birds in spring.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Thy father cares not for my breast,
    'Tis thine, sweet baby, there to rest:
    'Tis all thine own! and if its hue
    Be changed, that was so fair to view,
    'Tis fair enough for thee, my dove!
    My beauty, little child, is flown;
    But thou wilt live with me in love,
    And what if my poor cheek be brown?
    'Tis well for me; thou canst not see
    How pale and wan it else would be.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Dread not their taunts, my little life!
    I am thy father's wedded wife;
    And underneath the spreading tree
    We two will live in honesty.
    If his sweet boy he could forsake,
    With me he never would have stay'd:
    From him no harm my babe can take,
    But he, poor man! is wretched made,
    And every day we two will pray
    For him that's gone and far away.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    I'll teach my boy the sweetest things;
    I'll teach him how the owlet sings.
    My little babe! thy lips are still,
    And thou hast almost suck'd thy fill.
    --Where art thou gone my own dear child?
    What wicked looks are those I see?
    Alas! alas! that look so wild,
    It never, never came from me:
    If thou art mad, my pretty lad,
    Then I must be for ever sad.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Oh! smile on me, my little lamb!
    For I thy own dear mother am.
    My love for thee has well been tried:
    I've sought thy father far and wide.
    I know the poisons of the shade,
    I know the earth-nuts fit for food;
    Then, pretty dear, be not afraid;
    We'll find thy father in the wood.
    Now laugh and be gay, to the woods away!
    And there, my babe; we'll live for aye.

TITLE Lines Written While Sailing

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    How rich the wave, in front, imprest
    With evening-twilight's summer hues,
    While, facing thus the crimson west,
    The boat her silent path pursues!
    And see how dark the backward stream!
    A little moment past, so smiling!
    And still, perhaps, with faithless gleam,
    Some other loiterer beguiling.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Such views the youthful bard allure,
    But, heedless of the following gloom,
    He deems their colours shall endure
    'Till peace go with him to the tomb.
    --And let him nurse his fond deceit,
    And what if he must die in sorrow!
    Who would not cherish dreams so sweet,
    Though grief and pain may come to-morrow?

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Glide gently, thus for ever glide,
    O Thames! that other bards may see,
    As lovely visions by thy side
    As now, fair river! come to me.
    Oh glide, fair stream! for ever so;
    Thy quiet soul on all bestowing,
    'Till all our minds for ever flow,
    As thy deep waters now are flowing.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Vain thought! yet be as now thou art,
    That in thy waters may be seen
    The image of a poet's heart,
    How bright, how solemn, how serene!
    Such heart did once the poet bless,
    Who, pouring here a[c ] _later_ ditty,
    Could find no refuge from distress,
    But in the milder grief of pity.

RHYME a b a b c d c d 

    Remembrance! as we glide along,
    For him suspend the dashing oar,
    And pray that never child of Song
    May know his freezing sorrows more.
    How calm! how still! the only sound,
    The dripping of the oar suspended!
    --The evening darkness gathers round
    By virtue's holiest powers attended.

TITLE

RHYME a b a b 

    "Why William, on that old grey stone,
    "Thus for the length of half a day,
    "Why William, sit you thus alone,
    "And dream your time away?

RHYME a b a b 

    "Where are your books? that light bequeath'd
    "To beings else forlorn and blind!
    "Up! Up! and drink the spirit breath'd
    "From dead men to their kind.

RHYME a b a b 

    "You look round on your mother earth,
    "As if she for no purpose bore you;
    "As if you were her first-born birth,
    "And none had lived before you!"

RHYME a b a b 

    One morning thus, by Esthwaite lake,
    When life was sweet I knew not why,
    To me my good friend Matthew spake,
    And thus I made reply.

RHYME a b a b 

    "The eye it cannot chuse but see,
    "We cannot bid the ear be still;
    "Our bodies feel, where'er they be,
    "Against, or with our will.

RHYME a b a b 

    "Nor less I deem that there are powers,
    "Which of themselves our minds impress,
    "That we can feed this mind of ours,
    "In a wise passiveness.

RHYME a b a b 

    "Think you, mid all this mighty sum
    "Of things for ever speaking,
    "That nothing of itself will come,
    "But we must still be seeking?

RHYME a b a b 

    "--Then ask not wherefore, here, alone,
    "Conversing as I may,
    "I sit upon this old grey stone,
    "And dream my time away."

TITLE The Tables Turned

RHYME a b a b 

    Up! up! my friend, and clear your looks,
    Why all this toil and trouble?
    Up! up! my friend, and quit your books,
    Or surely you'll grow double.

RHYME a b a b 

    The sun above the mountain's head,
    A freshening lustre mellow,
    Through all the long green fields has spread,
    His first sweet evening yellow.

RHYME a b a b 

    Books! 'tis a dull and endless strife,
    Come, hear the woodland linnet,
    How sweet his music; on my life
    There's more of wisdom in it.

RHYME a b a b 

    And hark! how blithe the throstle sings!
    And he is no mean preacher;
    Come forth into the light of things,
    Let Nature be your teacher.

RHYME a b a b 

    She has a world of ready wealth,
    Our minds and hearts to bless--
    Spontaneous wisdom breathed by health,
    Truth breathed by chearfulness.

RHYME a b a b 

    One impulse from a vernal wood
    May teach you more of man;
    Of moral evil and of good,
    Than all the sages can.

RHYME a b a b 

    Sweet is the lore which nature brings;
    Our meddling intellect
    Misshapes the beauteous forms of things;
    --We murder to dissect.

RHYME a b a b 

    Enough of science and of art;
    Close up these barren leaves;
    Come forth, and bring with you a heart
    That watches and receives.

TITLE The Complaint

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Before I see another day,
    Oh let my body die away!
    In sleep I heard the northern gleams;
    The stars they were among my dreams;
    In sleep did I behold the skies,
    I saw the crackling flashes drive;
    And yet they are upon my eyes,
    And yet I am alive.
    Before I see another day,
    Oh let my body die away!

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    My fire is dead: it knew no pain;
    Yet is it dead, and I remain.
    All stiff with ice the ashes lie;
    And they are dead, and I will die.
    When I was well, I wished to live,
    For clothes, for warmth, for food, and fire;
    But they to me no joy can give,
    No pleasure now, and no desire.
    Then here contented will I lie;
    Alone I cannot fear to die.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    Alas! you might have dragged me on
    Another day, a single one!
    Too soon despair o'er me prevailed;
    Too soon my heartless spirit failed;
    When you were gone my limbs were stronger,
    And Oh how grievously I rue,
    That, afterwards, a little longer,
    My friends, I did not follow you!
    For strong and without pain I lay,
    My friends, when you were gone away.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    My child! they gave thee to another,
    A woman who was not thy mother.
    When from my arms my babe they took,
    On me how strangely did he look!
    Through his whole body something ran,
    A most strange something did I see;
    --As if he strove to be a man,
    That he might pull the sledge for me.
    And then he stretched his arms, how wild!
    Oh mercy! like a little child.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    My little joy! my little pride!
    In two days more I must have died.
    Then do not weep and grieve for me;
    I feel I must have died with thee.
    Oh wind that o'er my head art flying,
    The way my friends their course did bend,
    I should not feel the pain of dying,
    Could I with thee a message send.
    Too soon, my friends, you went away;
    For I had many things to say.

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    I'll follow you across the snow,
    You travel heavily and slow:
    In spite of all my weary pain,
    I'll look upon your tents again.
    My fire is dead, and snowy white
    The water which beside it stood;
    The wolf has come to me to-night,
    And he has stolen away my food.
    For ever left alone am I,
    Then wherefore should I fear to die?

RHYME a a b b c d c d e e 

    My journey will be shortly run,
    I shall not see another sun,
    I cannot lift my limbs to know
    If they have any life or no.
    My poor forsaken child! if I
    For once could have thee close to me,
    With happy heart I then would die,
    And my last thoughts would happy be,
    I feel my body die away,
    I shall not see another day.

TITLE The Convict

RHYME a b a b 

    The glory of evening was spread through the west;
      --On the slope of a mountain I stood;
    While the joy that precedes the calm season of rest
      Rang loud through the meadow and wood.

RHYME a b a b 

    "And must we then part from a dwelling so fair?"
      In the pain of my spirit I said,
    And with a deep sadness I turned, to repair
      To the cell where the convict is laid.

RHYME a b a b 

    The thick-ribbed walls that o'ershadow the gate
      Resound; and the dungeons unfold:
    I pause; and at length, through the glimmering grate,
      That outcast of pity behold.

RHYME a b a b 

    His black matted head on his shoulder is bent,
      And deep is the sigh of his breath,
    And with stedfast dejection his eyes are intent
      On the fetters that link him to death.

RHYME a b a b 

    'Tis sorrow enough on that visage to gaze.
      That body dismiss'd from his care;
    Yet my fancy has pierced to his heart, and pourtrays
      More terrible images there.

RHYME a b a b 

    His bones are consumed, and his life-blood is dried,
      With wishes the past to undo;
    And his crime, through the pains that o'erwhelm him, descried,
      Still blackens and grows on his view.

RHYME a b a b 

    When from the dark synod, or blood-reeking field,
      To his chamber the monarch is led,
    All soothers of sense their soft virtue shall yield,
      And quietness pillow his head.

RHYME a b a b 

    But if grief, self-consumed, in oblivion would doze,
      And conscience her tortures appease,
    'Mid tumult and uproar this man must repose;
      In the comfortless vault of disease.

RHYME a b a b 

    When his fetters at night have so press'd on his limbs,
      That the weight can no longer be borne,
    If, while a half-slumber his memory bedims,
      The wretch on his pallet should turn,

RHYME a b a b 

    While the jail-mastiff howls at the dull clanking chain,
      From the roots of his hair there shall start
    A thousand sharp punctures of cold-sweating pain,
      And terror shall leap at his heart.

RHYME a b a b 

    But now he half-raises his deep-sunken eye,
      And the motion unsettles a tear;
    The silence of sorrow it seems to supply,
      And asks of me why I am here.

RHYME a b a b 

    "Poor victim! no idle intruder has stood
      "With o'erweening complacence our state to compare,
    "But one, whose first wish is the wish to be good,
      "Is come as a brother thy sorrows to share.

RHYME a b a b 

    "At thy name though compassion her nature resign,
      "Though in virtue's proud mouth thy report be a stain,
    "My care, if the arm of the mighty were mine,
      "Would plant thee where yet thou might'st blossom again."
